


















Governance Standard (No. 7)



Corporate Social Responsibility, Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions












Contents



Subject                                                                        Para.    Page

Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions
1. Introduction..........................................................................                   971
2. Scope of the Standard .......................................................... (2-3)          971
3. Definition of Corporate Social Responsibility for Islamic
Financial Institutions ........................................................... (4-6)          972
4. Objectives of the Standard .................................................. (7-9)          972
5. Responsibilities Under This Standard................................ (10-33)        973
5/1 Structure of corporate responsibility........................... (11-20)        973
5/2 Mandatory conduct.......................................................     (21-33)        973
5/3 Recommended conduct................................................                     977
6. Disclosure Requirements and Presentation  Treatment
Options ......................................................................................     (34-52)        982
6/1 Mandatory disclosure requirements ...........................  (34-42)        982
6/2 Voluntary disclosure......................................................     (43-52)        985
7. Responsibility Under this Standard ................................... (53-56)        987
7/1 Compliance and attestation function..........................  (53-55)        987
7/2 Implementation function..............................................   (56)           988
8. Effective Date ........................................................................ (57)           988
Adoption of the Standard....................................................                         989
Appendix (a): Brief History of the Preparation of the
Standard.............................................................                    990
Appendix (b): Reasons for the Standard .................................                       992
Appendix (c): Basis for Conclusions........................................                      993
Appendix (d): Definitions .........................................................                     997
Appendix (e): Examples of Disclosure Format and
Presentation ......................................................                     999




969












Corporate Social Responsibility
Conduct and Disclosure for
Islamic Financial Institutions


1. Introduction

The purpose of this Governance Standard for Islamic Financial Insti- tutions (GSIFI) is to establish standards on the definition of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) for Islamic Financial Institutions, provide both mandatory and recommended standards to implement CSR in all aspects of the Islamic Financial Institution’s (IFI)(1)  activities and pro- vide guidance on disclosure of CSR information to the IFI’s stakeholders. (para. 1)

2. Scope of the Standard

The principles of this standard are applicable to all IFIs, regardless of their legal form, country of incorporation or size. However, the specific rules and provisions of this standard for activities, compliance and disclosure are classified into mandatory and recommended sections. The mandatory sections are applicable to all IFIs regardless of their legal form, country of incorporation or size. The recommended sections are only applicable to IFIs which have the capacity, financial or otherwise, to carry out or comply with such activities (para. 2).

Should the requirements of this standard contradict the IFI’s charter or the laws and regulations of the country in which it operates, a disclosure should be made to that effect. Islamic Insurance companies may disregard
provisions that are not applicable to their operations. (para. 3)

(1) The IFIs referred to in this standard are defined as any institution that plays the role of a financial intermediary that strictly abides by the provisions of the Shari’a. These include, but are not limited to Islamic banks and Islamic Insurance companies.



971



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

3. Definition of Corporate Social Responsibility for Islamic Financial
Institutions

Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) for IFIs refers to all activities carried out by an IFI to fulfill its religious, economic, legal, ethical and discretionary responsibilities as financial intermediaries for individuals and institutions. (para. 4)

Religious responsibility refers to the overarching obligation of IFIs to obey the laws of Islam in all its dealings and operations. Economic responsibility refers to the obligation for Islamic banks to be financially viable, profitable and efficient. Legal responsibility refers to the obligation of IFIs to respect and obey the laws and regulations of the country of operation. Ethical responsibility refers to the obligation of IFIs to respect the mass of societal, religious and customary norms which are not codified in law. Discretionary responsibility refers to the expectation from stakeholders that IFIs will perform a social role in implementing Islamic ideals over and above the religious, economic, legal and ethical responsibilities. (para. 5)

This standard does not focus on economic or legal responsibilities of IFIs as it is assumed that the management/accounting  structure and other accounting and governance standards are designed to fulfill economic responsibilities, while legal responsibilities are codified and enforced by the state and its functions. (para. 6)

4. Objectives of the Standard

The primary objective of this GSIFI is to prescribe uniform standards on CSR activities and compliance for IFIs. It is not the intended objective of the standard to prescribe new principles and rules of conduct for IFIs, but to codify existing principles and rules in a comprehensive structured format. (para. 7)
The second objective of this standard is to ensure that the CSR activities and compliance of IFIs are communicated in a uniform, truthful, transparent and comprehensible manner to relevant stakeholders to whom the IFI owes a duty of accountability. (para. 8)



972



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

The objectives of this standard,  as stipulated above, and the standard itself are intended to encourage IFIs to take a proactive role in applying CSR to all aspects of their operations. (para. 9)

5. Responsibilities Under This Standard

5/1 Structure of corporate social responsibility

The responsibilities under this standard are divided between man- datory and recommended  conduct. Within  mandatory  conduct, there are specific responsibilities  which an IFI must  carry out, while there is guidance on the discretionary  methods  by which these specific responsibilities may be carried out. (para. 10)

5/2 Mandatory conduct

5/2/1 Policy for screening clients

IFIs shall implement a CSR policy for screening prospective clients. This policy must include
a) Screening criteria
b) The approval of the Shari’a Supervisory Board of the screening criteria. (para. 11)
The policy stipulating the screening criteria may include pro- visions:
i. Forreviewofthe compliance ofprospectiveclient’s investments with Islamic law, among other aspects, if any, based on the discretion of the IFI,
ii. Requiring that effective screening processes are in place to prevent third parties from using the IFI to engage in criminal activities such as money laundering
iii. For review of the prospective client’s compliance with prin- ciples and rules of CSR as contained within this standard, particularly mandatory core conduct as stipulated in sections
5/2 (extended to the prospective clients).
iv. For review of the impact of the prospective client’s investment on the economy, society and the environment.



973



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

v.  Stating that any future abrogation of the terms of financing, as stipulated under this policy, will result in violation of contractual terms (with the remedy to be decided by the IFI). (para. 12)
If these policy terms form part of the contractual agreement with clients, a policy disclosure must be made to prospective clients stipulating  these policy terms  prior  to contractual agreement. (para. 13)

5/2/2 Policy for responsible dealing with clients

IFIs shall implement a CSR policy for responsible dealing with clients, including provisions relating to avoidance of onerous terms on clients, marketing ethics, implementing responsible financing practices in all types of transactions with clients and dealing with late repayments and insolvent clients. This policy shall stipulate:
a) That all contract forms have to be screened by the Shari’a supervisory board or its agent to avoid the imposition of onerous terms and conditions to clients who are in a weaker bargaining position relative to the IFI,
b)Provisions  to ensure  that  all marketing  campaigns  and documents   are  ethically  balanced  promoting business without  an exclusive focus on profits  that  may induce inappropriate behaviour/consumption and unsuitable products  inconsistent  with Islamic, social and  cultural norms,
c) The obligations and rights of each party to transactions undertaken with the IFI,
d) The due process and responsible  terms  and conditions under which financing is extended to clients, taking into consideration the client’s ability to repay and the effect on the client’s financial and overall well-being, through assessment of the client’s present disposable income capacity,
e) The remedies available, in the event that one or both parties violate their contractual terms,



974



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

f) The opinion of the Shari’a Supervisory Board regarding late payment charges,
g) Late payment charges to be charged to clients, if any,
h)How the IFI allocates the late payment charges in its accounts
(allocation to revenue or charity),
i) The conditions under which IFIs will defer collection of debt from insolvent clients. (para. 14)
A policy disclosure shall be made to clients prior to execution of any contract. This policy disclosure shall form part of the contractual terms and conditions. (para. 15)

5/2/3 Policy for earnings and expenditure prohibited by Shari’a

IFIs shall implement a CSR policy for earnings and expenditure prohibited by Shari’a. (impermissible or haram transactions). This policy must include a due process procedure wherein the following must be documented for impermissible transactions:
a) Specific description of each material transaction and aggregate description of accumulated immaterial transactions
b)Revenue, expense, liability or asset amount of each material transaction  and  aggregate revenue, expense, liability or asset amount of accumulated immaterial transactions,
c) Reasons for undertaking such transactions,
d) The Shari’a Supervisory Board’s verdict on the necessity of these transactions,
e) How the IFIs intends to dispose of such revenues, assets or liabilities, and
f) Recommendations for finding viable permissible or halal alternatives for similar impermissible transactions  in the future. (para. 16)
The procedure  above should be read in conjunction with and supplements any existing AAOIFI standards  that re- late  to  earnings  and  expenditure prohibited by Shari’a. (para. 17)



975



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

5/2/4 Policy for employee welfare

IFIs shall implement a CSR policy for employee welfare. This policy shall stipulate provisions for the rights and obligations of employees, including provisions affording fair treatment of all employees, avoidance of discrimination, as well as expected behaviour of all employees. This policy may include specific provisions relating to:
a) Equal opportunity for all employees, regardless of gender, race, religion, disability or socio-economic background,
b)Merit-based  salary and promotion structure  for all em- ployees, regardless of gender, race, religion, disability or so- cio-economic background,
c) Establishing  long  term  incentive  schemes  and  further development  and training  incentive schemes for all em- ployees,
d)Provisions for maternity leave and flexible work hours for female employees,
e) Maximum allowable work hours under full-time, part-time and casual employment for all employees,
f) Prohibition  of discrimination  including, and not limited to, gender, race, religion, disability or socio-economic back- ground, penalties for such discrimination and avenues for complaints for such discrimination  without any manner of recrimination (Appointment(s) should be made within the  organization  to  deal with such  discrimination; the person(s)  appointed must be seen to be just and fair to all employees, regardless of the employee’s gender, race, religion, disability or socio-economic background),
g) Pro-actively establishing, monitoring and acting on realizable quotas/targets for employment of staff from disadvantaged backgrounds, with disabilities, from a minority group, and/or from under-represented groups in the formal economy (in-
cluding females) (affirmative action).



976



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

h) Elimination of child labour from the workforce and if not feasible, educational and familial support for children,
i) Elimination of class and race barriers between higher and lower ranking employees,
j) Expected behavior of all employees in line with the Code of
Ethics for the Employees of Islamic Financial Institutions, k) Expected behavior (humility, modesty and mutual respect) of
higher ranking employees towards lower ranking employees, vice versa, and
l) Occupational health and safety measures to be taken by the
IFI and by the employees (para. 18).
A policy disclosure must be made to all employees before commencement of the employment contract and preferably be disclosed in any form of media that is utilized to advertise employment   vacancies.  This  policy  disclosure  should form part of the contractual terms and conditions. Efforts should  be made to communicate  this policy disclosure to all employees in their native language (language most frequently used by the employee). (para. 19)
5/2/5 Policy for Zakah

The terms and conditions under which a Zakah policy must be established are stated in Shari’a Standard No. (35), State- ment of Financial Accounting No. (2): Concepts of Financial Accounting for Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions sec- tion 4/6 and Financial Accounting Standard No. (9) on Zakah. (para. 20)

5/3 Recommended conduct

5/3/1 Policy for Qard Hasan

IFIs may implement a CSR policy for Qard Hasan for social reasons. The provisions of this policy may include matters pertaining to:
a) Establishing a Qard Hasan fund,



977



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

b)Maintaining a record of sources of Qard Hasan funding (depositors, shareholders and/or other parties) (sources of funds),
c) Types of allowable beneficiaries of the Qard Hasan funds as determined by the bank (allowable uses of funds),
d) Circumstances  in  which  such  loans  are distributed  to individuals (or to organizations),
e) Contractual enforcement measures for debtors able to repay loans,
f) Write off conditions for debtors unable to repay loans, and g) Developing a strategy to increase Qard Hasan loans from the sources referred to in 5/3/1b, which are to be used solely for charitable purposes, and pro-actively establishing, monitoring and acting on realizable quotas/targets for this
particular strategy. (para. 21)
This policy may be monitored on a yearly basis. If imple- mented, this policy may supplement any provisions contained elsewhere in the AAOIFI standards including, Statement of Financial Accounting No. (2): Concepts of Financial Ac- counting for Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions section
4/7. (para. 22)
5/3/2 Policy for reduction of adverse impact on the environment

IFIs may implement a CSR policy for reducing the impact of the IFI on the environment. The provisions of this policy may include matters pertaining to:
a) Establishing organization wide guidelines on efficient and minimal usage of non-renewable resources,
b)Initiatives  to educate  employees to efficiently use non- renewable resources and increase use of renewable resources,
c) Incentives and initiatives to find alternatives to non-renewable sources of energy and materials for operations (e.g., e-mail bank statements instead of paper bank statements), or
d) incentives and initiatives to recycle renewable sources of materials within the organization (para. 23).



978



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

The provisions of this policy may be reviewed on a yearly basis to implement new and innovative methods by which to minimize the environmental impact of the IFI (para. 24).
5/3/3 Policy for social, development and environment based in- vestment quotas

IFIs may implement CSR policies for social, development and environment based investment quotas. This policy may include provisions for pro-actively establishing, monitoring and acting on realizable and profitable investment quotas/targets, based on the extent to which the investments directly or indirectly contribute to social, development and environmental causes. (para. 25)

Social Impact Investments: These policies may include quotas/ targets for social-impact investments, based on the role that the investments play in:
a) Assisting poor  and  needy  individuals  and  families, by financing business opportunities and/or education,
b)Assisting orphans,
c) Assisting heavily indebted  individuals  or  families with unfortunate circumstances,
d) Assisting in the provisioning of health and medical services to impoverished communities or areas,
e) Assisting in the development  of research and education facilities, particularly those that utilize and empower di- sadvantaged individuals or communities,
f) Assisting the  development  of small and  medium  sized entrepreneurs and family businesses,
g) Encouraging the development of Islamic and native societal culture, and
h)Discouraging contemporary social ills and vices. (para. 26) Development Impact Investments: These policies may include
quotas/targets for development impact investments:
a) That offer significant growth potential for the country of operation or for another developing country,



979



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

b)That  significantly contribute  to the development  of in- frastructure in the country of operation or for another de- veloping country,
c) That have a significant proportion of small to medium size enterprises (SME) or indirectly rely on small to medium size enterprises (SME), and/or
d)That directly or indirectly assists in the alleviation of social and economic disadvantages and discrimination including, and not limited to, micro-finance industry and third-sector organizations. (para. 27)
Environmental Impact Investment: These policies may include quotas/targets for environmental impact investments, based on the role that the investments play in:
a) Protecting the environment,
b)Reducing the impact of development on the environment, c) Encouraging individuals and  institutions  to protect  and
preserve the natural environment and reduce the impact of development on the environment, and
d) Increasing the use of renewable, sustainable sources of energy and/or reducing the reliance on scarce non-renewable sources of energy. (para. 28)
This policy may be monitored on a yearly basis, with revisions being made on based on quota/target performance. (para. 29)

5/3/4 Policy for par excellence customer service

IFIs may implement a CSR policy to develop par excellence customer  service skills of employees and contractors.  The provisions of this policy may include matters pertaining to:
a) Establishment of a code of conduct for all employees and contractors in dealing with customers (The code of conduct for customer service may include the provisions from the Code of Ethics for the Employees of Islamic Financial Ins- titutions section 6/3),



980



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

b)Active measures to be taken by management to develop customer service skills of employees, and
c) Surveys that provide customer service feedback on perfor- mance/quality and likely areas of improvement. (para. 30)
5/3/5 Policy for micro and small business and social savings and investments

IFIs may implement a CSR policy to assist micro and small business and social savings and investments. The provisions of this policy may include matters pertaining to:
a) Encouragement of micro and small business savings through special features and terms for these types of investment depositors,
b)Encouragement of social savings for marriages, children’s education,  community  based programs  and other social welfare programs through  special features and terms for these types of investment depositors,
c) Encouragement of both micro and small business savings and investment through combination features and terms for these types of investment depositors (e.g., savings deposit with higher rates of return and investment loans discounts etc), and
d) Encouragement of both  family savings and investment through combination features and terms for these types of in- vestment depositors (e.g., savings deposit with higher rates of return and investment loan discounts etc). (para. 31)
5/3/6 Policy for charitable activities

IFIs may implement a CSR policy for charitable activities. The provisions of this policy may include matters pertaining to:
a) Establishing a charity fund,
b)Establishing avenues for voluntary donations  by donors (e.g. from depositors, shareholders, clients, contractors and employees) for the charity,



981



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

c) Establishing fund raising drives (emergency or otherwise)
from bank’s clients through existing operational means,
d)Specifying target groups, communities and institutions that require assistance, including those described in policy for social impact based investment quota (section 5/3/4) and policy for environmental impact based investment quotas (section 5/3/5)
e) Means by which charity may be distributed to prospective donees, and
f) Contracting an agent or establishing a trust foundation to distribute funds to allocated charities. (para. 32)
5/3/7 Policy for Waqf management

IFIs may implement a CSR policy for managing Waqf properties on behalf of their beneficiaries. The provisions of this policy may include matters pertaining to:
a) Establishing a Waqf management department or allocating staff to a Waqf management function,
b)Establishing rules and guidelines based on Shari’a for Waqf management,
c) Establishing a fair rate structure for the provision of services by the bank, and
d) Giving discounted rates andflexible terms for Waqf investment financing. (para. 33)
6. Disclosure Requirements and Presentation Treatment Options
6/1 Mandatory disclosure requirements

Disclosure should be made, in a separate CSR report  contained within the annual report, of the material policies of the IFI with respect to its mandatory  CSR conduct to satisfy the information needs of the IFI’s stakeholders. Disclosure may also be made in other  reports  specifically targeted  towards  the  general  public. (para. 34)
It should be noted thatwhile disclosures are meantto be comprehensive, the potential user groups of CSR information are wide and hence



982



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

disclosures should be designed with the intention of making them as understandable as possible for the general public.(para. 35)

6/1/1 Disclosure of policy for screening clients

Disclosure should be made, in the annual report, of the CSR
policy on screening clients. This disclosure should stipulate
a) The specific provisions of the screening policy including the benchmarks and/or criterion utilized to measure compliance with Islamic law, and
b) Whether these have been approved by the Shari’a supervisory board. (para. 36)
6/1/2 Disclosure of policy for dealing with clients

Disclosure should be made, in the annual report, of the CSR policy on dealing with clients. This disclosure should stipulate the specific provisions of the CSR policy including:
a) The defined procedure of the IFI on avoiding the imposition of onerous contractual terms on clients who are in a weaker bargaining position relative to the IFI,
b) The provisions ensuring  that  marketing  campaigns and documents are ethically balanced,
c) The obligation and rights of both parties,
d) The due process and responsible  terms  and conditions under  which credit is extended to clients, including the process by which the client’s ability to repay and the effect on the client’s financial and overall well-being is assessed,
e) The remedies available in the event that one or both parties violate their contractual terms,
f) The Shari’a supervisoryboard’sopiniononthepermissibility of charging late payment charges,
g) Late payment charges levied on clients,
h)How the IFI allocates the late payment charges in its accounts
(allocation to revenue or charity), and
i) The conditions under which the IFI will defer collection of debt from insolvent clients. (para. 37)



983



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

6/1/3 Disclosure of earnings and expenditure prohibited by Shari’a

Disclosure  should  be made,  in the annual  report,  of the earnings and expenditure prohibited by Shari’a (impermissible or haram  transactions)  for the financial year, if any. This disclosure should stipulate the following items for the financial year:
a) Aggregate descriptions, amounts, account classification (re- venue, expense, liability or asset) and reasons for undertaking these types of transactions,
b)The SSB’s verdict on the necessity of these transactions, c) How the IFI intends to dispose of such amounts,,
d)The IFI’s strategy to find viable permissible or halal alter- natives, if any, for similar impermissible transactions in the future. (para. 38)
This comprehensive disclosure supplements existing disclosure required by other AAOIFI standards (Financial Accounting Standard No. (1): General Presentation and Disclosure in the Financial Statements of Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions section 3/6). (para. 39)
6/1/4 Disclosure of policy for employee welfare

Disclosure should be made, in the annual report, of the IFI’s policy for employee welfare. This disclosure should stipulate the provisions of the IFI policy and the measures taken to implement these provisions within the organization. (para. 40)

The disclosure may include the policy relating to affirmative action, including:
a) Provisions of the policy, including targeted disadvantaged groups,
b)Quotas/targets and achievements for the year, and
c) Reasons for upward and downward revisions in quotas/
target.
This disclosure may be included with the mandatory dis- closure of the policy for employee welfare. (para. 41)



984



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

6/1/5 Disclosure of policy for Zakah

Disclosure should be made for Zakah, in the financial state- ments, in accordance with the provisions of Financial Account- ing Standard No. (1): General Presentation and Disclosure and Financial Accounting Standard No. (9) on Zakah. (para. 42)

6/2 Voluntary disclosure

Disclosure may be made of the material policies of the IFI with respect to its recommended CSR conduct to satisfy the information needs of the IFI’s stakeholders. Disclosure may be made in other reports specifically targeted towards the general public. (para. 43)

It should be noted thatwhile disclosures are meantto be comprehensive, the potential user groups of CSR information are wide and hence disclosures should be designed with the intention of making them as understandable as possible for the general public.(para. 44)

6/2/1 Disclosure of policy for social, development and environment based investment quotas

Disclosure may be made, in the annual report, of the CSR policy for social, development  and/or  environment based investments quotas and the extent of implementation of this policy for the financial year. The disclosure may include:
a) The provisions of the policy,
b)Classes of investments  by ultimate  purpose/beneficiary of investments (e.g., orphans, SME development, Islamic culture, reduction  in tree logging, reduction  in environ- mental  greenhouse  gases, increase in recycling, science and technology)
c) The profitability of such investments for the year, d) Quotas/targets and achievements for the year, and
e) Reasons for upward and downward revisions in quotas/
target (para. 45).
6/2/2 Disclosure of policy for par excellence customer service

Disclosure may be made, in the annual report, of the CSR policy for par excellence customer service. The disclosure may include:



985



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

a) Provisions of the policy,
b) Measures taken by management to develop customer service skills, and
c) Aggregate results of customer surveys demonstrating ove- rall quality of customer service and areas of improvement. (para. 46)
6/2/3 Disclosure of policy for micro and small business and social savings and investments

Disclosure may be made, in the annual report, of the CSR policy for micro and small business and social savings and investments. The disclosure may include:
a) Provisions of the policy;
b)Features of the offer;
c) Measures taken by management to implement the provisions of the policy;
d) Quotas/targets and achievements for the year; and
e) Reasons for upward and downward revisions in quotas/
target (para. 47).
6/2/4 Disclosure of policy for Qard Hasan

Disclosure may be made, in the annual report, of the CSR policy for Qard Hasan. The disclosure may include:
a) Whether there is a formal scheme operated by the bank for depositors, shareholders and other parties to place their funds for the use of Qard Hasan borrowers,
b)Provisions of the policy/scheme including conditions for those unable to repay the loans,
c) Sources of funding for Qard Hasan loans,
d)Aggregate purposes for which the Qard Hasan loans have been made,
e) Quotas/targets to increase internal and external Qard Hasan funding and achievements for the year in this regard, and
f) Reasons for upward and downward revisions in quotas/
target. (para. 48)



986



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

The disclosure requirement should be read in conjunction with and supplements any disclosure recommended by the existing AAOIFI Statement of Financial Accounting No. (2): Concepts of Financial Accounting for Islamic Banks and Financial Insti- tutions section 4/7 and Financial Accounting Standard No. (1): General Presentation and Disclosure in the Financial State- ments of Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions section 4/7. (para. 49)

6/2/5 Disclosure of policy for charitable activities

Disclosure may be made, in the annual report, of the CSR
policy for charitable activities. The disclosure may include:
a) Provisions of the policy,
b) Aggregate classes of charitable activities by ultimate benefi- ciary and amounts distributed to each aggregate class,
c) Quotas/targets and achievements for the year, and
d)Reasons for upward and downward revisions in quotas/
target. (para. 50)
This disclosure will supplement any disclosure recommended by the existing AAOIFI Statement of Financial Accounting No. (2): Concepts of Financial Accounting for Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions section 4/6 and Financial Accounting Standard No. (9): Zakah (para. 51).

6/2/6 Disclosure of policy for Waqf management

Disclosure may be made, in the annual report, of the CSR
policy for Waqf management. The disclosure may include:
a) Types of Waqf managed by the IFI,
b)Financial and other services offered to the Awqaf by the
IFI. (para. 52)
7. Responsibility Under This Standard
7/1 Compliance and attestation function

It is the responsibility of the board of directors of the IFI to ensure compliance  with the provisions  of this standard.  The Board of



987



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

directors  shall ensure  that  an independent compliance  audit  is performed prior to its attestation  of CSSR conduct. (para. 53)

The compliance function will comprise testing of compliance, in form and in substance, with mandatory CSR conduct provision as well as recommended  CSR conduct provisions which have been adopted by the IFI. (para. 54)

The attestation  by the board of directors of the IFI will comprise a signing declaration containing:
a) A statement which stipulates that management has pro-actively engaged in the mandatory and voluntary provisions of the CSR standard in all its conduct; and/or
b) A statement which stipulates that management’s representations in the annual report regarding its CSR conduct fairly represent management’s actual conduct. (para. 55)
7/2 Implementation function

The responsibility for implementation of this standard lies with the management of an IFI. (para. 56)

8. Effective Date

This Standard shall be effective for financial periods beginning 1 Muharram
1431 A.H. or 1 January 2010 A.D. (para. 57)























988



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions





Adoption of the Standard


The Standard on Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions was adopted  by the Accounting  and Auditing Standards Board in its meeting No. (35) held on 6 Rabi’ II, 1430
A.H., corresponding to 2 April 2009 A.D.











































989



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions





Appendix (A)
Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (31) held in Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain on 17 Jumada I 1427 A.H., corresponding to 13 June 2006 A.D., the Accounting and Auditing Standard Board decided to develop a new standard on Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions.

Subsequently, a consultant was commissioned to prepare a preliminary study and exposure draft of the Standard on Investments in Associates. Preparation of the preliminary study and exposure draft was overseen by the Auditing and Governance Standards Committee.

The preliminary study and exposure draft were discussed by the Auditing and Governance Standards Committee through a series of meetings and telephone conference calls.

The preliminary  study and exposure draft were also deliberated  by Accounting and Auditing Standard Board in its meetings No. (33) held in Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain on 24 Jumada I, 1429 A.H., corresponding to 29 May 2008 A.D., and No. (34) held in Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain on 14 Dhul-Qa’dah 1429 AH., corresponding to 12 November 2008 A.D.

Listening session for the exposure draft was convened in Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain on 24 Safar 1430 A.H., corresponding to 19 February
2009 A.D., to gather comments from the Islamic finance industry as well as accounting and auditing professions.
The exposure  draft was revised in light of the comments  made in Accounting and Auditing Standards Board meeting No. (34) and the listening session.



990



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

The Accounting and Auditing Standards Board adopted the Standard on Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions at its meeting No. (35) held on 6 Rabi’ II, 1430 A.H.,
corresponding to 2 April 2009 A.D.



















































991



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions





Appendix (B)
Reasons for the Standard


The reason for this standard is to provide specific guidance to IFIs to engage in productive CSR activities and disclose the nature of these activities to their stakeholders. Since there is no comparable standard generally and specifically for IFIs, this is an important standard to ensure the legitimacy and reputation of IFIs are preserved.

The rationale for this standard stems from the significant variation in the practice and understanding of CSR by IFIs. A number of research papers indicate that IFIs have widely varying CSR practices, with some IFIs really delivering high quality CSR initiatives and reports, whereas other IFIs are simply not interested in CSR. The papers also suggest that CSR activities are misunderstood as any activity that is not directly aligned with profit incentives. As a result, a number of IFIs engage in supporting activities that are not within the definition of social responsibility as espoused by Islamic scholars and thinkers. Rather, they are perceived to be marketing ploys to enhance the reputation of the IFI, with little direct social or environmental improvement.
The Islamic perspective on social responsibility is that the activities must directly assist individuals or societies to enhance their living or environmental conditions or assist them to better comply with religious rules and norms. Islam discourages the boasting of socially responsible activities to enhance one’s own image. However, this does not necessarily imply that institutions representing   stakeholders  should  not  be accountable.  Indeed,  Islam encourages accountability and therefore IFIs should be held accountable by their stakeholders for the extent of engagement in social activities.







992



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions





Appendix (C)
Basis for Conclusions


CSR derives itself from core principles in the Noble Qur`an. The three major foundational principles for CSR are the vicegerency of mankind on earth, divine accountability and the duty on mankind to enjoin good and forbid evil.

Vicegerency

The principle of vicegerency denotes that mankind is the representative of Allah on earth and as such Allah has entrusted mankind with stewardship of Allah’s Possession. Allah states this principle in the Qur`an: {“...Verily, I am going to place (mankind) generations after generations on earth...”};(1) and Allah further states: {“And it is He Who has made you generations coming after generations, replacing each other on the earth...”}.(2)

Divine Accountability
The principle  of divine accountability  flows from  the vicegerency principle and denotes that individuals will be accountable to Allah for all of their actions on the Day of Judgment. This principle is expounded in several verses of the Qur`an, two of which are: {“...Certainly, Allah is Ever a Careful Account Taker of all things”},(3)  {“So whosoever does good equal to the weight of an atom (or a small ant), shall see it. And whosoever does evil equal to the weight of an atom (or a small ant), shall see it.”}(4)  This divine accountability is the basis for all actions of a Muslim.(5) and in turn the representative organizations of Muslims.

(1) [Al-Baqarah (The Cow): 30]. (2) [Al-An’am (The Cattle): 165]. (3) [Al-Nisa` (The Women): 86].
(4) [Al-Zalzalah (The Earthquake): 7-8]. (5) One who submits to the Will of Allah.



993



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

Enjoining Good and Forbidding Evil
The principle of enjoining good and forbidding evil encapsulates the responsibilities that Allah places on Muslims as trustees and vicegerents. Allah says: {“The believers, men and  women,  are Awliya`  (helpers, supporters, friends, protectors) of one another, they enjoin (on the people) Al-Ma’ruf (i.e. IslamicMonotheismandall thatIslam orders one to do), and forbid (people) from Al-Munkar (i.e. polytheism and disbelief of all kinds, and all that Islam has forbidden)...”}(1) and in another verse, Allah states:
{“You [true believers in Islamic Monotheism, and real followers of Prophet Muhammad and his Sunnah (legal ways, etc.)] are the best of peoples ever raised up for mankind; you enjoin Al-Ma’ruf (i.e. Islamic Monotheism and all that Islam has ordained) and forbid Al-Munkar (polytheism, disbelief and all that Islam has forbidden)...”}(2) This responsibility is overwhelming and encompasses all aspects of a Muslim’s life. It comprises a prescription towards positive (permissible and recommended) actions and a prescription against negative (impermissible and not recommended) actions. IFIs have generally ensured their operational status by avoiding negative actions. However, their approach to positive actions has been varied due to a lack of standards in the area.

The combination  of these principles denotes a divine accountability for each Muslim to enjoin good and justice and forbid evil and injustice. These core principles therefore constitute the basis of individual social responsibility.

Collective Religious Duty and Islamic Financial Institutions
IFIs came into existence as a collective religious obligation(Fard Kifayah)(3) on the larger community (Ummah). This obligation is to operate a financial intermediary for individuals in the larger community wishing to comply with Islamic law (Shari’a). In this special position, IFIs are able to perform the obligations that individuals cannot perform themselves. The IFIs are therefore representatives for individuals who:

(1) [Al-Tawbah (The Repentance): 71].
(2) [Al-’Imran (The Family of Imran): 110].
(3) Fard Kifayah refers to a collective religious duty which, if performed by some, would exempt others from performing it. However, if it is not performed by any, the entire community is sinful.



994



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

i. Invest their money as shareholders or investment accountholders; ii. Have co-operative, partnership or borrowing relations with the IFI; iii. Are employed by the IFI;
iv.Have other explicit contractual relations with the IFI; and
v.In addition to the above, have an implicit social contract with the IFI
as part of the larger community (Ummah).

Second, IFIs hold a position of significant responsibility in society as financial intermediaries which source and allocate funds. The example set by IFIs has an impact on other individuals, institutions and organizations.

These two points denote that IFIs are a Fard Kifayah.(1) It is therefore pertinent that IFIs play a role in encouraging the right type of behavior and activities while discouraging the wrong type of behavior and activities.

Islamic Corporate Social Responsibility

The core foundations  of CSR are the same as the foundations  for individual social responsibility of each Muslim; that is to enjoin right and to forbid wrong. The definition of right and wrong in Islam can be defined in various dichotomies which are overlapping. In their legal form, right refers to everything that is permissible or recommended (Halal and Mustahab respectively), while wrong refers to everything that is impermissible or not recommended (Haram and Makruh respectively). From the perspective of Islamic jurisprudence, right refers to what is just while wrong refers to what is unjust.

However, because IFIs are a collective religious obligation (Fard Kifayah), the definition of right and wrong are sometimes of a different nature than those that apply to individuals. This is because IFIs have a special religious and financial position in society.
Religiously, IFIs have a responsibility  to comply with the form and substance of Islamic law in all aspects of their operations. This is because they are in an exemplary position. This means that all aspects of its operations

(1) Fard Kifayah refers to a collective religious duty which, if performed by some, would exempt others from performing it. However, if it is not performed by any, the entire community is sinful.



995



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

should be conducted in a permissible or recommended manner while no aspect of its operation should be conducted in an impermissible or not recommended  manner.  If it is conducted  in  an  impermissible or  not recommended manner, it is an obligation to disclose to its stakeholders the reasons for that particular conduct.

Financially, IFIs are intermediaries which mobilize funds from investors and allocate funds to projects and other investments. In this context, it is the responsibility of IFIs to mobilize funds from permissible and recommended sources  and  invest funds  in permissible  and  recommended projects. Further, IFIs are also in an exemplary position as financial intermediaries and hence can significantly impact the conduct of the IFIs stakeholders.

Mandatory and Recommended Conduct Classifications
The classification between mandatory and recommended conduct is based on the Qur`anic principle of not imposing responsibilities on individuals (and  in extension organizations) by Allah greater than  what they can endure. This is clear in Allah’s Saying: {“Allah burdens not a person beyond his scope...”}.(1)

























(1) [Al-Baqarah (The Cow): 286].



996



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions





Appendix (D)
Definitions


Clients

Clients in this standard  are defined  as those  individuals  who and corporations which execute a sale, lease, borrowing or partnership agreement with the IFI. This does not include Investment Accountholders or depositors of any type.

Contractors

Contractors in this standard are defined as businesses or corporations that provide services to the IFI in return for a contractually agreed con- sideration. Contract workers are differentiated from employees because they do not have a direct contractual relationship with the IFI.

Customers

Customers in this standard are defined as all individuals and institutions that execute any type of contract in which the Islamic bank provides a good or service in return for valuable consideration.

Deposit Customers

Deposit customers in this standard are defined as those individuals and institutions which execute a contract to place funds with the IFI for safe keeping, deposit or investment. This does not include shareholders of any type.

Employees
Employees in this standard are defined as individual who work directly for the IFI in return for valuable consideration. This includes all ordinary connotations of the word employee including full-time, part-time, casual, seasonal, contract and project based employment. Employees do not include contract workers working for a business or corporation other than the IFI.



997



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

Employees are differentiated from contract  workers because employees have a direct  contractual  relationship  with the IFI, whereas contract workers do not have a direct contractual relationship with the IFI.

Investment Deposits

Investment deposits in this standard are defined as deposits placed by customers for the purposes of gaining an investment rate of return, and not for the sole purpose of safe keeping. These include investment accountholders.

Investment Assets

Investment assets in this standard are defined as those assets that bring a future economic benefit invested in by the IFI for the direct purpose of gaining a return and not for an operational purpose (e.g. fixed assets).

Qard Hasan

Qard Hasan in this standard is defined as a non-interest bearing loan intended to allow the borrower to use the loaned funds for a period of time with the understanding that the same amount of the loaned funds would be repaid at the end of the period.

Waqf

Waqf (plural Awqaf) in this standard is defined as an inalienable religious endowment in Islam.

Zakah
Zakah is a fixed religious obligation calculated by reference to net assets (including cash) that have appreciated or have the capacity to appreciate in value over a specific period of time except for assets that have been acquired for consumption or use in the production of revenues. Zakah is a religious obligation on wealth for every Muslim, including a child or an insane person, must meet provided his net assets are liable for Zakah.












998



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions





Appendix (E)
Examples of Disclosure
Format and Presentation


Notes:
The purpose of this example is to illustrate the application of some of the provisions of this standard. The example is not intended to illustrate the only acceptable method for the presentation of or the disclosure of CSR activities and compliance. Furthermore, the example does not reflect all requirements of the standard.

It should be noted that while disclosures are meant to be comprehensive, the potential user groups of CSR information are wide and hence disclosures should be designed with the intention of making them as understandable as possible for lay people.

The disclosures may be supplemented, if possible, with images of the tangible benefits resulting from CSR activities and compliance.

Example of Comprehensive  CSR Report

In the Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful

(Name of Institution)

Islamic Corporate Social Responsibility Report

For the year ended xxx

(Name of Institution) is engaged in implementing ideals of Islamic Social Responsibility to the best of its ability in all aspects of its operations. In line with these ideals, (Name of Institution) has applied best practice standards on Islamic Corporate Social Responsibility issued by the Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial Institutions.



999



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

These standards stipulate mandatory and recommended forms of Islamic Corporate Social Responsibility activities and compliance. (Name of Institution)  has implemented both mandatory and rec- ommended forms of Islamic Corporate Social Responsibility.

The implementation of these standards in true Islamic form and substance by the management of (Name of Institution) is attested by the board of directors in its report to shareholders. Presented below is a summary of the compliance and initiatives undertaken by (Name of Institution) during the year ended xxx.

Social Responsibility within the Organization
Employee welfare
[State policy and affirmative action initiatives for employee welfare here]

Internal environmental preservation policy
[State policy for reduction of environmental impact and initiatives, targets and achievements for the year here]

Earnings and expenditure prohibited by the Shari’a
[State policy for impermissible transactions and detailed informa- tion for the year here]

Social responsibility  in its relationship  with customers and clients
Par excellence customer service
[State policy for customer service, initiatives, targets, achievements and survey results for the year here]

Late repayments and insolvent clients and avoiding onerous terms
[State policy for late repayments and insolvent clients and avoiding onerous terms here]

Qard Hasan
[State policy for Qard Hasan and detailed information for the year including beneficiaries of Qard Hasan here]




1000



Governance Standard No. (7):
Corporate Social Responsibility Conduct and Disclosure for Islamic Financial Institutions

Special features

[State policy on encouragement of entrepreneur and social savings and investments here and initiatives, targets and achievements for the year here]
Social Responsibility in Screening Its Investments

Screening of clients for compliance with Islamic principles and social responsibility
[State policy on screening of clients and contractors here]

Investment quotas based on industry, social impact and envi- ronmental impact
[State policy on investment quotas and initiatives, targets and achievements for the year here]

Social Responsibility in Its Relationship with Greater Society

Zakah

[State policy on Zakah and detailed information  about Zakah for the financial year here]

Charitable activities

[State policy on charitable activities and detailed information on charitable activities for the financial year here]

Waqf management
[State policy on Waqf management here and detailed information on types of Awqaf managed, services offered to Awqaf, and initiatives for the financial year here]














1001

