

















Auditing Standard No. (4)




Testing for Compliance with Shari’a Rules and Principles by an External Auditor












Contents


Subject                                                                        Para.    Page

Testing for Compliance with Shari’a Rules and Principles
By an External Auditor
Introduction...............................................................................       (1-4)          863
Responsibility of an External Auditor for Compliance with
Shari’a Rules and Principles ..................................................... (5-8)          864
Scope of the Auditor’s Work .................................................... (9-15)         864
Reference to the SSB’s Report in the Auditor’s Report.........      (16)           865
Making the Auditor’s Draft Report Available to the SSB.....     (17)           866
Effective Date.............................................................................       (18)           866
Adoption of the Standard....................................................                         867































861












Testing for Compliance with
Shari’a Rules and Principles by an External Auditor


Introduction

1. The purpose of this Auditing Standard for Islamic Financial Institutions (ASIFI) is to establish standards and provide guidance on the subject of testing for compliance with Shari’a Rules and Principles by an external auditor in connection with the audit of the financial statements of a financial institution which conducts business in conformity with Shari’a Rules and Principles.

2. For the purposes of this ASIFI, the term “auditor” shall be used to refer to the external auditor only. The term “auditor” shall not apply to any internal audit function that may be associated with the IFI.
3. When testing for Shari’a compliance, the auditor shall obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence that provides the auditor with reasonable assurance that the Islamic financial institution (IFI)(1)  has complied with Shari’a Rules and Principles. As discussed in ASIFI (1), reasonable assurance is “the concept relating to the accumulation of the audit evidence necessary for the auditor to conclude that there are no material misstatements in the financial statements taken as a whole. Reasonable assurance relates to the whole audit process.” ASIFI (1) also states that, “Reasonable assurance also means that the auditor has satisfied himself that the transactions he examined during his audit comply with Shari’a Rules and Principles as determined by the Shari’a [Supervisory] Board of the financial institution.”

(1) The term (institution/institutions) is used to represent Islamic financial institutions, including banks.



863




Auditing Standard No. (4):
Testing for Compliance with Shari’a Rules and Principles By an External Auditor

4. The steps included below are relevant to the provisions that supports the requirements of this ASIFI.

Responsibility of an External Auditor for Compliance with Shari’a Rules and Principles
5. While the auditor is responsible for forming and expressing an opinion on the financial statements, the management of the IFI is responsible for ensuring  that  the  financial statements  and  the  IFI’s  activities comply with Shari’a Rules and Principles as determined by the Shari’a supervisory board (SSB) as set out in ASIFI (1) and ASIFI (2).

6. As explained in Governance Standard for Islamic Financial Institutions (GSIFI) No. (1), the responsibility to interpret the Rules and Principles of Shari’a lies with the SSB.

7. The auditor shall be knowledgeable about Shari’a Rules and Principles.
However, he would not possess the same level of knowledge as that of SSB members and thus the auditor shall not be expected to provide interpretation of these rules and principles.

8. The fatwas, rulings and guidance issued by the SSB form the basis on which the auditor considers whether the IFI has complied with Shari’a Rules and Principles.

The auditor shall use these as a basis for concluding whether the financial statements of the IFI have been prepared in accordance with Shari’a Rules and Principles.

Scope of the Auditor’s Work

9. The responsibility of the auditor is to form an opinion on whether the transactions of the IFI are in compliance with the fatwas, rulings and guidance issued by the SSB of the IFI.

10. The auditor shall have no responsibility for assessing the competence of the members of the SSB.
11. The auditor shall satisfy himself that the IFI’s process for introducing new products or modifying existing products includes appropriate



864




Auditing Standard No. (4):
Testing for Compliance with Shari’a Rules and Principles By an External Auditor

procedures for ensuring compliance with Shari’a Rules and Principles including reviews by IFI management, internal audit and the SSB.

12. The auditor shall include procedures in his examination to ensure that all new fatwas, rulings and guidance, and modifications to existing fatwas, rulings and guidance are identified and reviewed for each period under examination.

13. As part of his own scope of work, the auditor shall review available documents to ensure that all types of products offered by the IFI have been subject to a review by the SSB in accordance with GSIFI No. (2), and shall satisfy himself that the SSB has found these products to be in compliance with Shari’a Rules and Principles. The documents to be reviewed shall include the reports issued by the SSB to the IFI concerning the Shari’a compliance as well as the SSB’s minutes of meetings. The auditor shall give consideration to  the  matters contained in  these documents and their effect on the work to be carried out by him.

14. The auditor  shall also verify that the transactions  entered into by the IFI are consistent with the fatwas, rulings and guidelines of the SSB. This verification shall be carried out by the auditor on a test basis. The nature and extent of the testing is subject to the individual circumstances of the IFI and shall be determined by the auditor after careful consideration of these circumstances.

15. The auditor shall also review the findings of all internal reviews carried out by the IFI management, the internal audit, and as set out in GSIFI No. (3), by an internal Shari’a review. Consideration shall be given to the findings of these reviews and whether these findings effect the nature, timing or extent of the work carried out by the auditor during his examination.

Reference to the SSB’s Report in the Auditor’s Report
16. The auditor shall make available the auditor’s  report only after he has taken note of the SSB’s draft report on the IFI’s compliance with Shari’a Rules and Principles. If the SSB’s draft report indicates that compliance with Shari’a  Rules and  Principles is lacking, and  the



865




Auditing Standard No. (4):
Testing for Compliance with Shari’a Rules and Principles By an External Auditor

auditor decides, based on the SSB’s draft report, to modify his draft report, he shall provide an adequate explanation of the nature of and reasons for the modification.

Making the Auditor’s Draft Report Available to the SSB

17. Prior to issuance of the final report of the SSB, the auditor shall make available to the SSB his draft report and conclusions related to Shari’a compliance.

Effective Date
18. This Standard shall be effective for financial statements for the financial periods beginning 1 Muharram 1423 A.H. or 1 January 2002 A.D.








































866




Auditing Standard No. (4):
Testing for Compliance with Shari’a Rules and Principles By an External Auditor





Adoption of the Standard


The Testing forCompliance withShari’a Rules andPrinciples by anExternal Auditor standard was adopted by the Accounting and Auditing Standards Board in its meeting No. (19) held on 17 Safar 1421 A.H., corresponding to
21 May 2000 A.D.










































867

