























Auditing Standard No. (2)



Auditor’s Report












Contents


Subject                                                                        Para.    Page

Auditor’s Report
Introduction...............................................................................       (1-4)          825

Basic Elements of the Auditor’s Report..................................  (5-26)         825
Auditor’s Report ........................................................................    (27-28)        830
Modified Report........................................................................ (29)           832
Matters That Do Not Affect the Auditor’s Opinion .............                        832
Matters That Do Affect the Auditor’s Opinion .....................  (30-40)        833
Circumstances That May Result in Other Than an Unqualified
Opinion ..........................................................................................     (41-46)        835
Effective Date.............................................................................       (47)           838
Adoption of the Standard....................................................                         839





























823












Auditor’s Report


Introduction

1. The purpose of this Auditing Standard for Islamic Financial Institutions (ASIFI) is to establish standards and provide guidance on the form and content of the auditor’s report issued as a result of an audit performed by an independent auditor of the financial statements of a financial institution which conducts business in conformity with Shari’a Principles. Much of the guidance provided can be adapted to auditor’s reports on financial information other than financial statements.

2. The auditor should review and assess the conclusions drawn from the audit evidence obtained as the basis for the expression of an opinion on the financial statements.

3. This review and assessment involves considering whether the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the accounting standards of the Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial Institutions (AAOIFI) and relevant national standards or practices. It will also be necessary to consider whether the financial statements comply with statutory requirements.

4. The auditor’s report  should contain  a clear written  expression of opinion on the financial statements taken as a whole.

Basic Elements of the Auditor’s Report

5. The auditor’s report includes the following basic elements:

a) Title,
b) Addressee,
c) Opening or introductory paragraph,
d) Scope paragraph (describing the nature of the audit),
e) A Reference to the ASIFIs and relevant national standards or practices, f) A Description of the work the auditor performed,



825





Auditing Standard No. (2): Auditor’s Report

g) Opinion paragraph containing an expression of opinion on the financial statements,
h) Date of report,
i)  Auditor’s address, and j)  Auditor’s signature.
A measure of uniformity in the form and content of the auditor’s report is desirable because it helps to promote the reader’s understanding and to identify unusual circumstances when they occur.

Title
6. The auditor’s report should have an appropriate title.

Addressee
7. The auditor’s report should be appropriately addressed as required by the circumstances of the engagement and local laws and regulations.

Opening or introductory paragraph
8. The auditor’s report should identify the financial statements of the financial institution that have been audited, including the date of and period covered by the financial statements.

9. The report should include a statement that the financial statements and the financial institution’s undertaking to operate in accordance with Shari’a Rules and Principles are the responsibility of the financial institution’s management, and a statement that the responsibility of the auditor is to express an opinion on the financial statements based on the audit. (Consideration should be given to the definition of management in relevant national legislation and regulations.)

10. Financial statements  are the representations  of management.  The preparation of such statements requires management to make signifi- cant accounting estimates and judgments, as well as to determine the appropriate accounting principles and methods used in preparation of the financial statements. In contrast, the auditor’s responsibility is to audit these financial statements in order to express an opinion thereon.
11. An illustration of these matters in an opening (introductory)  para- graph is:



826





Auditing Standard No. (2): Auditor’s Report

“We have audited the accompanying statement of financial position of the Example Islamic Financial Institution  as of ……… (end of financial period) and the related statements of income and cash flows (and the other financial statements specified in Financial Accounting Standard No. (1): General Presentation and Disclosure in the Financial Statements of Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions) for the period then ended. These financial statements and the financial institution’s undertaking to operate in accordance with Shari’a Rules and Principles are the responsibility of the financial institution’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audit.”

Scope paragraph

12. The auditor’s report should describe the scope of the audit by stating that the audit was conducted in accordance with ASIFIs and relevant national standards or practices as appropriate which do not contravene the Shari’a Rules and Principles. “Scope” refers to the auditor’s ability to perform audit procedures deemed necessary in the circumstances. This assures the reader that the audit has been carried out in accordance with established standards or practices. Unless otherwise stated, the national auditing standards or practices followed are presumed to be those of the country indicated by the auditor’s address.

13. The report should include a statement that the audit was planned and performed to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatements.

14. The auditor’s report should describe the audit as including:

a) Examining, on a test basis, evidence to support the financial statement amounts and disclosures
b) Assessing the accounting principles used in the preparation of the
financial statements
c) Assessing the significant estimates made by management in the preparation of the financial statements, and
d) Evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.



827





Auditing Standard No. (2): Auditor’s Report

15. The report should include a statement by the auditor that the audit provides a reasonable basis for the opinion.

16. An illustration of these matters in a scope paragraph is:

“We conducted  our  audit  in accordance with Auditing Standards for  Islamic Financial Institutions  (and  refer to  relevant  national legislation, regulations and standards or practices). Those Standards require that  we plan and  perform  the audit  to obtain  reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.”

Opinion paragraph
17. The auditor’s  report  should  clearly state the  auditor’s  opinion  as to  whether the financial statements  give a true  and  fair view in accordance with the Shari’a Rules and Principles as determined by the Shari’a Supervisory Board of the Islamic financial institution and the financial reporting framework and, where appropriate, whether the financial statements comply with statutory requirements.

18. The term used to express the auditor’s opinion is “give a true and fair view”. This term indicates, amongst other things, that the auditor considers only those matters that are material to the financial statements.

19. The financial reporting framework is determined  by the AAOIFI, statutory requirements, rules issued by professional bodies, and the development of general practice within a country, with an appropriate consideration of fairness and the financial institution’s undertaking to operate in conformity with Shari’a Rules and Principles. To advise the reader of the context in which “fairness” is expressed, the auditor’s opinion  will indicate  the  framework  upon  which  the  financial
statements are based by using words such as “in accordance with



828





Auditing Standard No. (2): Auditor’s Report

(indicate accounting standards of the AAOIFIs and relevant national legislation, regulations and standards or practices)”.

20. In addition  to an opinion  on the true and fair view, the auditor’s report may need to include an opinion as to whether the financial statements  comply with other  requirements  specified by relevant statues or law.

21. An illustration of these matters in an opinion paragraph is:

“In our opinion, the financial statements give a true and fair view of the financial position of the Example Islamic Financial Institution as of … (end of financial period) and of the results of its operations and its cash flows (and state also the opinion on the other financial statements) for the financial period then ended in accordance with the Shari’a Rules and Principles (as determined by the Shari’a Board of the Financial Institution) and in accordance with the accounting standards of the AAOIFI … (and comply with …)”

22. In any situation where it is not evident which country’s accounting principles  have been  used, the  country  should  be stated.  When reporting  on  financial statements  that  are distributed  extensively outside the country of origin, it is recommended  that the auditor refer to the standards of the country of origin in the auditor’s report, such as:

“… in accordance with accounting principles established by the AAOIFI
and generally accepted in country …”

This designation will help the user to better understand  which ac- counting principles were used in preparing the financial statements. When reporting on financial statements that are prepared specifically for use in another country (for example, where the statements have been translated into the language and currency of another country in a cross-border financing), the auditor will consider the need to refer to the accounting principles of the country of origin where prepared, and will consider whether appropriate disclosure has been made in
the statements.



829





Auditing Standard No. (2): Auditor’s Report

Date of report

23. The auditor should date the report as of the completion date of the audit.
This informs the reader that the auditor has considered the effect on the financial statements and on the report of the events and transactions of which the auditor became aware and that occurred up to that date.

24. Since the auditor’s responsibility is to report on the financial statements as prepared and presented by management, the auditor should not date the report earlier than the date on which the financial statements are signed or approved by management.

Auditor’s address

25. The report should name a specific location, which is ordinarily the city where the auditor  maintains  the office that has responsibility for the audit.

Auditor’s signature

26. The report should be signed either in the name of the audit firm, the personal name of the auditor or both, as appropriate.

Auditor’s Report

27. An unqualified opinion should be expressed when the auditor concludes that the financial statements give a true and fair view in accordance with the identified financial reporting framework. An unqualified opinion also indicates implicitly that any changes in accounting principles or in the method of their application, and the effects thereof, have been properly determined and disclosed in the financial statements.
28. Thefollowing is anillustrationof theentireauditor’s reportincorporating the basic elements set forth and illustrated above. This report illustrates the expression of an unqualified opinion.












830





Auditing Standard No. (2): Auditor’s Report

Auditor’s Report

(Appropriate Addressee)
We have audited the accompanying statement of financial position of the Example Islamic Financial Institution as of … (end of financial period) and the related statements of income, and cash flows (and the other financial statements specified in Financial Accounting Standard No. (1): General Presentation and Disclosure in the Financial Statements of Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions) for the financial period then ended. These financial statements and the Financial Institution’s undertaking to operate in accordance with Shari’a are the responsibility of the Financial Institution’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audit.

We conducted our audit in accordance with the Auditing Standards for Islamic Financial Institutions (and refer to relevant national legislation, regulations and standards or practices). Those Standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.

In our opinion, the financial statements give a true and fair view of the financial position of the Example Islamic Financial Institution as of … (end of financial period) and of the results of its operations and its cash flows (and state also the opinion on the other financial statements) for the financial period then ended in accordance with the Shari’a Rules and Principles as determined by the Shari’a Board of the Financial Institution and the accounting standards of the AAOIFI … (and comply with …).

Auditor

Date

Address



831





Auditing Standard No. (2): Auditor’s Report

Modified Reports
29. An auditor’s report is considered to be modified in the following situations:

1. Matters that do not affect the auditor’s opinion:
Emphasis of a matter

2. Matters that do affect the auditor’s opinion:
a) Qualified opinion,
b) Disclaimer of opinion, or c) Adverse opinion.
Uniformity in the form and content of each type of modified report will increase the user’s understanding  of such reports. Accordingly, this ASIFI includes suggested wording to  express an  unqualified opinion as well as examples of modifying phrases for use when issuing modified reports.

Matters That Do Not Affect the Auditor’s Opinion
30. In  certain  circumstances,  an  auditor’s  report  may  be  modified by adding an emphasis of matter  paragraph to highlight a matter affecting the financial statements which is included in a note to the financial statements that more extensively discusses the matter. The addition of such an emphasis of matter paragraph does not affect the auditor’s opinion. The paragraph would preferably be included after the opinion paragraph and would ordinarily refer to the fact the auditor’s opinion is not qualified in this respect.

31. The auditor should modify the auditor’s report by adding a paragraph to highlight a material matter regarding a going concern problem.

32. The auditor should consider modifying the auditor’s report by adding a paragraph if there is a significant uncertainty (other than a going concern problem) the resolution of which is dependent upon future events and which may affect the financial statements. An uncertainty is a matter whose outcome depends on future actions or events not under the direct control of the financial institution but that may affect the financial statements.

33. An illustration of an emphasis of matter paragraph for a significant uncertainty in an auditor’s report follows:



832





Auditing Standard No. (2): Auditor’s Report

“In our opinion … (remaining words are the same as illustrated in the opinion paragraph 28 above).

Without qualifying our opinion we draw attention to Note (X) to the financial statements. The Financial Institution is the defendant in a lawsuit alleging infringement of certain patent rights and claiming royalties and punitive damages. The Financial Institution has filed a counter action, and preliminary hearings and discovery proceedings  on both actions are in progress. The ultimate outcome of the matter cannot presently be determined, and no provision for any liability that may result has been made in the financial statements.”

34. The addition of a paragraph emphasizing a going concern problem or significant uncertainty  is usually adequate to meet the auditor’s reporting responsibilities regarding such matters. However, in extreme cases, such as situations  involving multiple uncertainties that  are significant to  the  financial statements,  the  auditor  may consider it appropriate to express a disclaimer of opinion instead of adding an emphasis of matter paragraph.

35.In addition to the use of an emphasis of matter paragraph for matters that affect the financial statements, the auditor may also modify the auditor’s report by using an emphasis of matter paragraph, preferably after the opinion paragraph, to report on matters other than those affecting the financial statements. For example, if an amendment is necessary to other information in a document containing audited financial statements and the financial institution refuses to make the amendment, the auditor would consider including in the auditor’s report an emphasis of matter paragraph  describing the  material  inconsistency. An  emphasis of matter paragraph may also be used when there are additional statutory reporting responsibilities.

Matters That Do Affect The Auditor’s Opinion
36. An auditor may not be able to express an unqualified opinion when either  of the  following circumstances  exists and  in  the  auditor’s judgement the effect of the matter is or may be material to the financial statements:



833





Auditing Standard No. (2): Auditor’s Report

a) There is a limitation on the scope of the auditor’s work, or
b) There is a disagreement with management regarding the imple- mentation  of Shari’a Rules and Principles as determined by the Shari’a Board of the financial institution, the acceptability of the accounting policies selected, the method of their application or the adequacy of financial statement disclosures.
The circumstances described in (a) could lead to a qualified opinion or a disclaimer of opinion. The circumstances described in (b) could lead to a qualified opinion or an adverse opinion. These circumstances are discussed more fully in paragraphs (41–46).

37. A qualified opinion should be expressed when the auditor concludes that an unqualified opinion cannot be expressed but that the effect of any disagreement with management, or limitation on scope is not so material and pervasive as to require an adverse opinion or a disclaimer of opinion. A qualified opinion should be expressed as being “except for” the effects of the matter to which the qualification relates.

38. A disclaimer of opinion should be expressed when the possible effect of a limitation on scope is so material and pervasive that the auditor has not  been able to obtain  sufficient appropriate  audit  evidence and accordingly is unable to express an opinion  on the financial statements.

39. An adverse opinion should be expressed when the effectof a disagreement is so material and pervasive to the financial statements that the auditor concludes that a qualification of the report is not adequate to disclose the misleading or incomplete nature of the financial statements.

40. Whenever the auditor expresses an opinion that is other than unqualified, a clear description of all the substantive reasons should be included in the report and, unless impracticable, a quantification of the possible effect(s) on the financial statements. Usually, this information will be set out in a separate paragraph preceding the opinion or disclaimer of opinion and may include a reference to a more extensive discussion, if any, in a note to the financial statements.



834





Auditing Standard No. (2): Auditor’s Report

Circumstances That May Result in Other Than an Unqualified Opinion
Limitation on Scope

41. A limitation on the scope of the auditor’s  work may sometimes be imposed by the financial institution (for example, when the terms of the engagement specify that the auditor will not carry out an audit procedure that he believes is necessary, or that he should not carry out an audit of the compliance of the financial institution with the Shari’a Rules and Principles). However, when the limitation in the terms of a proposed engagement is such that the auditor believes the need to express a disclaimer of opinion exists, the auditor would usually not accept such a limited engagement as an audit engagement unless required by statute. Also, a statutory auditor would not accept such an audit engagement when the limitation infringes on the auditor’s statutory duties.

42. A scope limitation may be imposed by circumstances (for example, when the timing of the auditor’s appointment is such that the auditor is unable to observe the counting of physical inventories). It may also arise when in the opinion of the auditor the financial institution’s accounting records are inadequate  or when the auditor  is unable to carry out an audit procedure believed to be desirable. In these circumstances the auditor  would attempt  to carry out  reasonable alternative procedures to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence to support an unqualified opinion.

43. When there is a limitation on the scope of the auditor’s work that requires expression of a qualified opinion or a disclaimer of opinion, the auditor’s report should describe the limitation and indicate the possible adjustments to the financial statements that might have been determined to be necessary had the limitation not existed.

44. Illustrations of these matters are set out below.

Limitation on scope-qualified opinion
“We have audited … (remaining words are the same as illustrated in the introductory paragraph (28) above).



835





Auditing Standard No. (2): Auditor’s Report

Except as discussed in the following paragraph, we conducted our audit in accordance with … (remaining words are the same as illustrated in the scope paragraph (28) above).

We  were unable  to  obtain  independent  confirmation  in  respect of a … transaction  amounting  to  (xx). In  addition,  the  original documentation relating to the … contract was not made available to us. There were no other satisfactory audit procedures that we could adopt to confirm that the amount is recoverable.

In our opinion, except for the effects of such adjustments, if any, as might have been determined to be necessary had we been able to satisfy ourselves as to the recoverability of the … amount, the financial statements give a true and fair view … (remaining words are the same as illustrated in the opinion paragraph (28) above).”

Limitation on scope-disclaimer of opinion

“We were engaged to audit the accompanying statement of financial postion of the Example Islamic financial institution  as of … (end of financial period) and the related statements of income, and cash flows (and  the  other  financial  statements  specified in  Financial Accounting Standard No. (1): General Presentationand Disclosure in the Financial Statements of Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions) for the financial period then ended. These financial statements and the  financial  institution’s  undertaking  to  operate  in  accordance with Shari’a are the responsibility of the financial institution’s management.  (Omit  the sentence stating the responsibility of the auditor).

(The paragraph discussing the scope of the audit should be amended according to the circumstances.)

(Add a paragraph discussing the scope limitations as follows:)

We  were unable  to  obtain  independent  confirmation  in  respect of a … transaction  amounting  to  (xx). In  addition,  the  original documentation relating to the … contract was not made available to



836





Auditing Standard No. (2): Auditor’s Report

us. There were no other satisfactory audit procedures that we could adopt to confirm that the amount is recoverable.

Because of the significance of the matters discussed in the preceding paragraph,  we are unable to express an opinion  on  the financial statements.”

Disagreement with management

45. The auditor may disagree with management about matters such as the acceptability of accounting policies selected, the method of their application, or the adequacy of disclosures in the financial statements. If such disagreements are material to the financial statements, the auditor should express a qualified or an adverse opinion.

46. Illustrations of these matters are set out below.

Disagreement on accounting policies-inappropriate accounting method-qualified oinion
“We have audited … (remaining words are the same as illustrated in the introductory paragraph (28) above).

We conducted our audit in accordance with … (remaining words are the same as illustrated in the scope paragraph (28) above).

As discussed in Note (X) to the financial statements, no depreciation has been provided in the financial statements, a practice which, in our opinion, is not in accordance with AAOIFI’s standards. The provision for the year ended … (end of financial period) should be xxx based on the straight-line method of depreciation using annual rates of 5% for the building and 20% for the equipment. Accordingly, the fixed assets should be reduced by accumulated depreciation of (xxx) and the loss for the year and the accumulated deficit should be increased by (xxx) and (xxx), respectively.

In  our  opinion,  except for the effect on  the financial statements of the matter referred to in the preceding paragraph, the financial statements give a true and fair view … (remaining words are the same as illustrated in the opinion paragraph (28) above).”



837





Auditing Standard No. (2): Auditor’s Report

Disagreement on accounting policies-inadequate disclosure-quali- fied opinion
“We have audited … (remaining words are the same as illustrated in the introductory paragraph (28) above).

We conducted our audit in accordance with … (remaining words are the same as illustrated in the scope paragraph (28) above).

On … the Islamic Financial Institution  entered in to … contracts amounting to (xx) for the purposes of financing commodities. The agreements limit the payment of future cash dividends to earnings arising after … (end  of year). In  our  opinion,  disclosure of this information is required by …

In our opinion, except for the omission of the information included in the preceding paragraph, the financial statements give a true and fair view … (remaining words are the same as illustrated in the opinion paragraph (28) above).”

Disagreement on accounting policies-inadequate disclosure-ad- verse opinion
“We have audited … (remaining words are the same as illustrated in the introductory paragraph (28) above).

We conducted our audit in accordance with … (remaining words are the same as illustrated in the scope paragraph (28) above).

(Paragraph(s) discussing the disagreement).

In our opinion, because of the effects of the matters discussed in the preceding paragraph(s), the financial statements do not give a true and fair view of the financial position of the Islamic Financial Institution as of … (end of financial period) and of the results of its operations and its cash flows (and state also the opinion on the other financial statements) for the financial period then ended in accordance with … (and do not comply with …).”

Effective Date
47. This standard shall be effective for financial statements for the financial periods beginning 1 Muharram 1418 A.H. or 1 January 1998 A.D.



838





Auditing Standard No. (2): Auditor’s Report





Adoption of the Standard


The standard of The Auditor’s Report was adopted by the Board in its meeting No. (11) held on 2–3 Muharram 1417 A.H., corresponding to 19–20
May 1996 A.D.












































839

