Auditing Standard No. (5)



Auditor’s Responsibility to Consider Fraud and Error in an Audit of Financial Statements












Contents


Subject
Auditor’s Responsibility to Consider Fraud and Error an Audit of Financial Statements
Para.          Page
Introduction...............................................................................              (1-3)          873

Definition and Cases of Error ................................................         (4)              874
Definition and Cases of Fraud.................................................          (5)              874
Responsibility of an Auditor....................................................         (6-7)          874
Professional Skepticism............................................................          (8-9)          875
Consideration of Fraud, Error and Audit Procedures..........   (10-12)     876
Considering the Effect of an Auditor’s Report ......................     (13)           877
Documentation .........................................................................             (14-16      877
Responsibility of Management and Corporate Governance
Body............................................................................................                (17-19)     878
Management Representations .................................................        (20)           878
Effective Date.............................................................................             (21)           879
Adoption of the Standard....................................................                         880






















871












Auditor’s Responsibility to Consider Fraud and Error in an Audit of Financial Statements


Introduction
1.   The purpose of this Auditing  Standard  for Islamic Financial Institutions (ASIFI) is  to establish guidance on the auditor’s responsibility when considering the risk of fraud and error in an audit of financial statements of   an   Islamic  financial  institution  (IFI).  The primary responsibility for the prevention and detection of fraud and error rests with those responsible for the corporate governance and management of  the IFI. However, the  auditor, when  planning and  performing the  audit procedures  and evaluating the results thereof, shall consider the risk of material misstatements resulting from fraud and error.

2.  The standard shall provide the following:
a)  Guidance on the characteristic of fraud and error and the limitation of the auditor’s responsibility in relation thereto;
b) Define the minimum procedures that shall be applied by an auditor in case of indication, inquiries and discussions relating to any fraud and error in the financial statement of an IFI;
c)  Guidance to the auditors relating to management representations considering fraud and error in an IFI.
3. The standard shall be read in conjunction with all ASIFI’s issued by the Accounting and Auditing  Organization  for Islamic  Financial Institutions  (AAOIFI).  This standard complements  the standards issued by the International  Federation of Accountants  on the consideration  of fraud and error by fulfilling specific additional requirements relating to IFI.











873



Auditing Standard No. (5):
Auditor’s Responsibility to Consider Fraud and Error in an Audit of Financial

Definition and Cases of Error
4.   Error refers to an unintentional misstatement in financial statements, including the omission of an amount or a disclosure, such as:
a) An incorrect accounting estimate as stated in Financial Accounting
Standards arising from oversight or misunderstanding of facts;
b) A mistake in the application of accounting principles and standards as stated in AAOIFI’s Financial Accounting Standards relating to
recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure;
c) An  incorrect  application  and  oversight  of  Shari’a  rules  and principles.
Definition and Cases of Fraud
5.  Fraud refers to an intentional act by one or more individuals among management, those charged with governance, employees, or third parties, involving the use of deception to obtain an unjust or illegal advantage, such as:
a)   Breach of contracts between the IFI, investors and other third parties  such as the misappropriation  of funds of investment accountholders in  the  case  of  Islamic  banks, and  policyholders in  the  case  of Islamic insurance companies (referred to hereafter as IAH and PA, respectively);
b) Intentional misallocation of profits between the IFI and IAH/PA; c) IFI’s misuse of IAH and PA funds including violation of contracts; d) Intentional  non  disclosure  by management  of  some  activities
and relevant information to the IFI’s Shari’a supervisory board, auditors, investors
and shareholders;
e) Intentional, consistent violation and misinterpretation of AAOIFI Shari’a standards and the IFI’s Shari’a supervisory board’s fatwas, rulings and guidelines;
f )  Intentional manipulation of documents and records to misrepresent the IFI’s financial
statements.
Responsibility of an Auditor
6.  With due consideration to ASIFI No. (1), “Objective and Principles of Auditing,” the objective of an audit of financial statements is to









874



Auditing Standard No. (5):
Auditor’s Responsibility to Consider Fraud and Error in an Audit of Financial

enable the auditor to express an opinion as to whether the financial statements are prepared, in all material respects, in accordance with Shari’a  rules  and  principles,  the accounting  standards  of  AAOIFI and   the   relevant   national   accounting   standards and  practices and legislation and regulation applied in the country in which the financial institution   operates.   An   audit   conducted   in   accordance with ASIFI and other recognized standards such as those issued by the International Federation of Accountants is designed to provide reasonable assurance that the financial statements taken as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether caused by fraud and error. The fact that an audit is carried out may act as a deterrent, but the auditor is not and cannot be held responsible for the prevention of fraud and error.

7.  However,  the auditor shall be held responsible  for negligence  and misconduct   if reasonable  efforts  are  not  seen  to  have  been  made in  designing  and  planning  the audit in order to detect fraud and error and/or it is shown that the auditor was aware of material fraud and error and did not take any necessary action to report it to the appropriate authority.
Professional Skepticism
8.   The auditor plans and performs an audit with an attitude of professional skepticism in accordance with ASIFI No. (1), “Objective and Principles of Auditing” (paragraph. 6). Such an attitude is necessary for the auditor to identify and properly evaluate the following:
■ Management’s compliance and application of all AAOIFI’s Shari’a standards as well as the fatwas, rulings and guidelines laid by the IFI’s Shari’a supervisory board. In addition, the  Shari’a  supervisory  board’s report  shall  not  be  the  sole  basis  for  the  auditor’s conclusion on the management’s compliance with Shari’a rules and principles.
■  Matters that increase the risk of a material misstatement  in the financial  statements resulting from fraud and error (for example, management’s  characteristics and influence over  the  control environment, industry  conditions, and operating characteristics  and
financial stability).















875



Auditing Standard No. (5):
Auditor’s Responsibility to Consider Fraud and Error in an Audit of Financial

■ Circumstances that make the auditor suspect that the financial sta- tements are materially misstated.
■ Evidence obtained (including the auditor’s knowledge from previous
audits)  that  brings  into  question the  reliability of  management representations.
9.  With due consideration to the above, unless the audit reveals evidence to the contrary, the auditor is entitled to accept records and documents as genuine. Accordingly, an audit performed in accordance with ASIFI and other relevant standards issued by the IFAC rarely contemplates authentication of documentation, nor are auditors trained as, or expected to be, experts in such authentication.
Consideration of Fraud, Error and Audit Procedures
10. In planning  the audit,  the auditor  shall assess  the risk that fraud and error may cause to the financial statements as well as the assets, balances and income of the funds of IAH/PA, to contain material misstatement.

11. In addition to making inquiries from management,  inquiries shall also include:
■  Discussions with members of the Shari’a supervisory board relating to professional judgement, interpretation, compliance and application of Shari’a rules and principles;
■ Discussion on how compliance with AAOIFI’s Shari’a Standards, Financial Accounting Standards and the fatwas rulings and guidelines issued by the Shari’a supervisory board of the IFI are ensured by management;
■ The  extent  of  the  transactions  covered  by  the  Shari’a  review  for determining the
adoption of the Shari’a rules and principles;
■ The extent of controls over the management and activities relating to investment of the assets, income and balances of the IAH/PA;
■  The introduction and application of effective internal control systems to   safeguard assets,  income  and  balances  of  the  funds  of  IAH/ PA, compliance with Shari’a rules
and principles and the Financial Accounting Standards issued by AAOIFI.














876



Auditing Standard No. (5):
Auditor’s Responsibility to Consider Fraud and Error in an Audit of Financial

12. The auditor  shall inquire  whether  management,  audit committee
or members of the Shari’a supervisory board are aware of any fraud and errors that have been suspected, discovered, investigated and/or reported.
Considering the Effect of an Auditor’s Report
13. When the auditor concludes that the financial statements are materially misstated as a result of fraud and error, the auditor shall consider the implications for the audit. The auditor shall then decide whether the audit shall be continued with the issuance of a qualified audit opinion or possible disclaimer in the audit report as stated in ASIFI No. (3), paragraphs (27-46).
Documentation
14. The auditor shall document fraud and error risk factors identified as being present during the auditor’s assessment process and document the auditor’s response to any such factors. If during the performance of the audit, fraud and error risk factors are identified that cause the auditor  to  believe  that  additional  audit  procedures  are  necessary, the auditor shall document the presence of such risk factors and the auditor’s response to them.

15. The auditor shall document matters which are important in providing evidence    to support   the   audit   opinion,   and   that   the   working papers shall state the auditor’s reasoning on all significant matters which require the auditor’s judgement, together with the auditor’s conclusion thereon. Because of the importance of fraud and error risk factors in the assessment of the inherent or control risk of material misstatement, the auditor shall document fraud risk factors identified and the response from management considered appropriate by the auditor.
16. The auditor shall document discussions held with the Shari’a supervisory board members, and conclusions of such discussions shall be supported by AAOIFI’s Shari’a standards and the fatwas, rulings and guidelines issued by the Shari’a supervisory board.














877



Auditing Standard No. (5):
Auditor’s Responsibility to Consider Fraud and Error in an Audit of Financial

Responsibility of Management and Corporate Governance Body
17. The primary responsibility for the prevention and detection of fraud and error rests with those charged with corporate governance and management of an IFI and the funds of the IAH and PA. Management shall set the proper procedures, create and maintain a culture  of  honesty  and  high  ethics  that  are  compatible  with  the  Code  of Ethics  for Employees of Islamic Financial Institution issued by AAOIFI, and establish appropriate controls to prevent and detect fraud and error within the IFI. In addition, management shall  set  controls and procedures over the requirements of applying Shari’a rules and principles to all activities of an IFI.

18. It is the responsibility of those in charge of the governance of the IFI to ensure, through oversight of management, the integrity of the accounting and financial reporting systems and that appropriate controls are in place, including those for monitoring risk, financial control and compliance with the Shari’a rules and principles.

19. The auditor shall assess that management has developed an appropriate system of internal control that shall also include compliance with Shari’a rules and principles.
Management Representations
20. The  auditor  shall  obtain  written  representations  from  management which shall include, inter alia, that:
a) It has complied with all the requirement of AAOIFI’s Shari’a standards and the fatwas, rulings and guidelines issued by the Shari’a supervisory board;
b) It has disclosed and raised all matters of concern known by management relating to the fraud and error in the IFI;
c) It has complied with all the provisions of the contracts of IAH/PA
contracts;
d) It has presented all Shari’a supervisory board’s fatwas, rulings and guidelines to the auditors;
e) It has placed the necessary controls over assets, income and balances
of the IAH/PA.











878



Auditing Standard No. (5):
Auditor’s Responsibility to Consider Fraud and Error in an Audit of Financial

Through management representations, management acknowledges its responsibility for the accounting and internal control systems designed to prevent and detect fraud and error.

Effective Date
21. This Standard shall be effective for financial periods beginning 1 Mu- harram 1425
A.H. or 1 January 2004 A.D.

















































879




Auditing Standard No. (5):
Auditor’s Responsibility to Consider Fraud and Error in an Audit of Financial




Adoption of the Standard


The Auditor’s responsibility to  Consider Fraud and Error in  an Audit of Financial Statement was adopted by the Accounting and Auditing Standards Board in  its  meeting No. (25) held in  Bahrain on 3  Rabi’ I,  1424 A.H.,
corresponding to 3 May 2003 A.D.











































880
