





















Governance Standard No. (4)



Audit and Governance Committee for Islamic Financial Institutions












Contents



Subject                                                                        Para.    Page

Audit and Governance Committee for Islamic Financial
Institutions
Introduction...............................................................................  (1)             923
Importance of AGC .................................................................  (2)             923
Functions of AGC .....................................................................  (3)             923
Responsibilities of AGC ........................................................... (4-9)          924
Establishing AGC .....................................................................    (10-13)        927
Reporting ...................................................................................       (14)           928
Effective Date.............................................................................       (15)           929
Adoption of the Standard....................................................                         930
Appendix: Specimen Terms of Reference ...........................                         931





























921












Audit and Governance Committee
for Islamic Financial Institutions


Introduction
1. The purpose  of this Governance  Standard  for Islamic Financial Institutions (GSIFI) is to define the role and responsibilities of an Audit and Governance Committee (AGC) for an Islamic financial institution (IFI). The standard also highlights the requirements for establishing such  a committee  for an IFI and  specifies the  prerequisites  for an effective AGC.
Importance of AGC
2. The importance  of the AGC (known internationally as the Audit
Committee) for an IFI emanates from its role in:
a) Achieving the fundamental objectives of an IFI, by enhancing greater transparency and disclosure in financial reporting; and
b) Enhancing the public’s confidence of the IFI as genuine in its application of Shari’a rules and principles.
Functions of AGC
3. The AGC has gained widespread acceptance as a prerequisite  for organizations  seeking  to  demonstrate a commitment to  higher standards  of corporate  governance.  The  AGC assists the  board of directors  in exercising independent and objective monitoring through  the following functions:
a) Preserving the integrity of the financial reporting process.
b) Safeguarding the interests of shareholders,  investors and other corporate stakeholders.
c) Providing  additional  assurance  on  the  reliability  of financial information presented to the board of directors, if the AGC is to be considered effective.
d) Acting as an independent link between the IFI’s management and its stakeholders.



923




Governance Standard No. (4):
Audit and Governance Committee for Islamic Financial Institutions

Responsibilities of AGC
The responsibilities of the AGC shall comprise the following:

Review of internal controls (including internal audit)
4. The AGC’s role with regard to internal controls is to ensure that the IFI has the appropriate controls in place and that these controls are functioning properly, as well as to monitor  the implementation  of management’s strategy. The AGC shall have a sufficient understanding of the IFI’s business and its control environment to make pertinent inquiries concerning systems of internal control. Implicit in such a function  is extensive interaction  with the IFI’s management,  its internal and external auditors and the ability to gauge the significance of problems and issues raised by these parties.
The specific responsibilities associated with this function include:
a) Comprehending the major risks to which the business is exposed. b) Monitoring management’s control consciousness as it relates to the significance attached to controlling the IFI’s policies, procedures,
methods, and organizational structure.
c) Reviewing the pressures on management to achieve results (e.g., remuneration arrangements, and market expectations).
d) Monitoring the adequacy of management reporting processes.
e) Reviewing resources and skills, scope of responsibilities, overall work programme and reporting lines of internal audit.
f) Reviewing the effectiveness of internal control systems, particularly focusing on major findings of internal audit, the external auditor’s management  letters and  of any other  reports  from  regulatory bodies together with management responses.
g) Reviewing the findings of central bank inspections and other reg- ulatory bodies together with management responses and ensuring that appropriate actions have been taken to comply with the central bank inspectors’ requirements.
h) Reviewing the IFI code of ethics and the effectiveness with which it is implemented.
i)  Reviewing the effectiveness of the IFI’s system for monitoring com- pliance with Shari’a rules and principles and legal requirements as



924




Governance Standard No. (4):
Audit and Governance Committee for Islamic Financial Institutions

well as considering the adequacy of controls over significant areas where loss or embarrassment could be caused to the IFI.
j)  Ensuring that the management of IFI has implemented the proce- dures that govern its relationship with the related parties.
Review of accounting practices and audit plan
5. Financial reporting of transactions,  projects and other activities in progress at a particular point in time includes recognition, measurement and disclosure of such activities. The outcome of such activities is subject to uncertainty and their measurement involves the use of accounting assumptions and judgment.
The specific responsibilities associated with this function include:
a) Understanding areas in the IFI exposed to high degrees of risk and uncertainty, with particular reference to judgmental areas involv- ing estimates, contingent liabilities and significant claims.
b) Reviewing the IFI’s accounting policies and practices and reporting requirements, with particular emphasis on the implications of new accounting standards and proposed changes in the IFI’s accounting policies and on areas in which choices exist between accounting methods or policies.
c) Reviewing the nature and scope of the audit with particular reference to high-risk areas or locations and the resources and skills of the auditors.
d) Ensuring  coordination  between internal  and  external auditors and ensuring that the independence and professional integrity of auditors is not compromised.
e) Considering any issues related to the appointment,  resignation or dismissal of members of the Shari’a Supervisory Board (SSB), chief internal auditor and/or the external auditors and reviewing proposals to appoint new members of the SSB, external auditors and/or chief internal auditor.
Review of interim and annual accounts and financial reports (inclusive of matters arising from the audit)
6. The over-riding  principle  with respect  to the  AGC’s  review of all the above-mentioned reports is to ensure their completeness, fairness



925




Governance Standard No. (4):
Audit and Governance Committee for Islamic Financial Institutions

and accuracy. The AGC shall review these reports (interim and annual accounts and financial reports) before their submission to the IFI’s board of directors. The review shall satisfy the AGC as to the fair presentation of reported earnings and the completeness of disclosures in the annual report  and  accounts. In  addition,  the AGC shall be briefed by the management on the latter’s  methodology with respect to developing and summarizing interim financial information. Also, the AGC shall be aware of any review procedures performed by the external auditors on interim financial statements.

The specific responsibilities associated with this function include:
a) Ensuring compliance with Shari’a, legal and regulatory requirements. b) Ensuring compliance with all Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial Institutions (AAOIFI) standards and determining
the appropriateness and effect of any changes in accounting policies and practices.
c) Reviewing the treatment of significant areas of judgment, accounting estimates and unusual transactions.
d) Reviewing significant adjustments arising from the audit.
e) Determining the appropriateness of the going concern assumption as the basis on which the accounts are prepared and if applicable, of the proposed statement by the directors that the company is a going concern.
f) Presenting a balanced and comprehensible assessment of the company’s position that relate to the responsibilities of the AGC.
Ethics
7. The fundamental principles governing the operation of an IFI have been enunciated in AAOIFI’s Code of Ethics for Accountants and Auditors of Islamic Financial Institutions.(1)  The AGC shall be governed by the principles listed below and shall endeavor to ensure that the IFI adheres to the same set of ethical values:
a) Faith-driven conduct.
b) Professional competence and diligence. c) Trustworthiness.

(1) AAOIFI’s Code of Ethics for Accountants and Auditors of Islamic Financial Institutions, Sections 2 and 3.



926




Governance Standard No. (4):
Audit and Governance Committee for Islamic Financial Institutions

d) Religious legitimacy. e) Objectivity.
f) Professional conduct and technical standards.
In order to ensure adherence to these fundamental values, it is imperative that the AGC of an IFI should work to facilitate Shari’a reviews by the SSB and the internal audit function of the IFI.
Reviewing the compliance with Shari’a rules and principles
8. The duties of the AGC also include the review of the reports produced by the internal Shari’a review and the SSB to ensure that appropriate actions have been taken. The AGC may invite a member of the IFI’s SSB to attend its meeting, as and when required.
Reviewing the use of restricted investment accounts’ funds
9. In the case of Islamic banks, funds are mobilized from investors based on Mudaraba contract or agency for both unrestricted and restricted investment accounts. The latter represents off-balance sheet accounts, and this places a greater responsibility on the Islamic bank’s management to ensure that the funds are invested in accordance with the terms of the agreement and that profits are allocated according to the agreed terms between the Islamic bank and holders of investment accounts which should be in compliance with Shari’a rules and principles. Co-ordination between the AGC, internal Shari’a reviewers and external auditors is imperative for the effective monitoring of restricted investment accounts.
Establishing the AGC
10. The specific structure of the AGC shall vary according to the IFI and the country in which it is established. However, certain features in terms of establishing the AGC and practicing its responsibilities include:
11. Constitution
a) The AGC shall be formally established by the board of directors from its non-executive members. The board of directors shall also appoint the chairman of the AGC. The AGC shall be vested with sufficient authority to carry out its responsibilities with independence and integrity.
b) The Terms Of Reference (TOR) of the AGC shall be set out in writing and state clearly the AGC’s powers and responsibilities and empower it to investigate any matters within its jurisdiction.



927




Governance Standard No. (4):
Audit and Governance Committee for Islamic Financial Institutions

c) The TOR will be used by the board of directors, AGC members, management, outside legal counsel, SSB, internal Shari’a reviewers and external auditors.
The Standard provides a sample TOR of the AGC applicable to an
IFI as an Appendix.
12. Membership
a) Attributes
AGC members shall be knowledgeable about the business of the institution and applicable regulations and laws to deal adequately with the accounting and auditing matters the AGC will face. They shall understand the related Shari’a rules and principles, and their application to various products and services offered by the IFI and shall have sufficient knowledge of AAOIFI’s standards.
b) Term of office and size
The term of office of an AGC shall match the term of the members of the board of directors. The AGC shall not have less than three members,  and  these should  represent  a balance of views and experience.
c) Remuneration
The AGC members’remuneration maybe basedonarecommendation by the board of directors to the general assembly meeting or on the prevailing laws and regulations applicable in the country.
13. AGC planning and meetings
The AGC shall –with the consent of the board of directors– prepare internal by-laws to govern the AGC meetings and who should attend the meetings without the right to vote.
Reporting
14. The reports of the AGC shall be submitted to the board of directors through the chairman of the board and copied at the same time to the chief executive officer. The names of the AGC may be mentioned in the annual reports. It is also recommended that the AGC’s chairman shall report to the chairman of the board of directors any significant matters of concern that arose at the last meeting to the AGC. The board of directors shall also discuss the work of the AGC based on its quarterly report.



928




Governance Standard No. (4):
Audit and Governance Committee for Islamic Financial Institutions

Effective Date
15. This Standard  shall be effective for financial periods beginning 1
Muharram, 1423 A.H. or 1 January 2002 A.D.





















































929




Governance Standard No. (4):
Audit and Governance Committee for Islamic Financial Institutions





Adoption of the Standard


The standard of the Audit and Governance Committee for Islamic Fi- nancial Institutions was adopted by the Accounting and Auditing Standards Board in its meeting No. (21) held on 8 Safar 1422 A.H., corresponding to
2 May 2001 A.D.











































930




Governance Standard No. (4):
Audit and Governance Committee for Islamic Financial Institutions





Appendix
Specimen Terms of Reference


Constitution

The board of directors hereby resolves to establish a committee of the board to be known as the Audit and Governance Committee (AGC).

Membership

The board of directors shall appoint the AGC members from the non- executive members of the board. The AGC shall not have less than three members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members.

The chairman of the AGC shall be appointed by the board of directors.

(All other requirements with respect to membership  of the AGC are explained in more detail in item 12 (a-c) of the Standard.)

Attendance at Meetings

The Terms Of Reference (TOR) shall state the persons who shall be invited to attend the meetings of AGC; for example, the finance director, the head of internal audit and representatives from other technical departments, external auditor, representative from the SSB and the internal Shari’a review. It shall also be stated whether the AGC shall meet at least once a year with the external auditors in the absence of any management executive.

The head of internal audit shall be the secretary of the committee.

Frequency of Meetings

The TOR shall state the number of meetings which must be held by the
AGC annually.

Authority
The AGC is authorized  by the board of directors  to investigate any activity within its terms of reference. It is authorized to seek any information



931




Governance Standard No. (4):
Audit and Governance Committee for Islamic Financial Institutions

it requires from any employee and all employees are directed to cooperate with any request by the AGC.

The AGC is authorized by the board of directors to obtain outside legal or other independent professional advice and to secure the attendance of outsiders with relevant experience and expertise if it considers this necessary.

Responsibilities

The responsibilities of the AGC shall be:

a) To consider the appointment  of the Shari’a supervisory board, ex- ternal auditor, and/or  the chief internal auditor, the audit fee, and any questions of resignation or dismissal. This will include reviewing skills and resources of the external auditor.
b) To discuss with the external auditors before the audit commences the nature and scope of the audit, and ensure co-ordination where more than one audit firm is involved
c) To review the interim and annual financial statements before submission to the board of directors, focusing particularly on:
■ Any changes in accounting policies and practices;

■ Major judgmental areas;

■ Significant accounting adjustments resulting from the audit;

■ The going concern assumption;

■ Compliance with the accounting standards issued by the Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial Institutions;
■ Compliance with regulatory bodies, stock exchange and legal requi- rements; and
■ Compliance with the procedures that govern the relationship between management and related parties.
d) To discuss problems and concerns arising from the external and internal audits, and any matters the external and internal auditors may wish to discuss (in the absence of management where necessary)
e) To review the reports of regulatory bodies together with management
responses



932




Governance Standard No. (4):
Audit and Governance Committee for Islamic Financial Institutions

f) To review the internal audit programme, consider the major findings of internal audit investigations and management’s response, and ensure co-ordination between the external and internal auditors
g) To keep under review the effectiveness of internal control systems, and in particular to review the external auditor’s management letter and management’s response
h) To ensure compliance with Shari’a rules and principles by implementing recommendations contained in reports produced by the SSB and the internal Shari’a reviewers
i)  To  coordinate  with  the  internal  Shari’a  reviewers, internal  and external auditors to ensure that restricted investment accounts are managed according to Shari’a rules and principles
j)  To consider other topics, as defined by the board of directors

Reporting Procedures
The secretary shall circulate the minutes of meetings of the AGC to the board of directors.






























933

