





















Governance Standard No. (1)



Shari’a Supervisory Board:

Appointment, Composition and Report












Contents


Subject                                                                        Para.    Page

Shari’a Supervisory Board: Appointment, Composition and
Report
Introduction...............................................................................  (1)             885
Definition of Shari’a Supervisory Board ................................     (2)             885
Appointment of Shari’a Supervisory Board...........................    (3-6)            885
Composition, Selection and Dismissal of Shari’a Supervisory
Board ................................................................................................   (7-8)            886
Basic Elements of the Shari’a Supervisory Board’s Report ..     (9-24)           886
Publication of the Report of the Shari’a Supervisory Board ....       (25)            890
Publication of Fatwas, Rulings and Guidelines of the Shari’a
Supervisory Board ......................................................................    (26)             890
Effective Date.............................................................................       (27)            890
Adoption of the Standard....................................................                         891
Appendix: Example Report of Shari’a Supervisory Board.....                        892

























883












Shari’a Supervisory Board:
Appointment, Composition and Report


Introduction

1. The purpose of this Governance Standard for Islamic Financial In- stitutions (GSIFI) is to establish standards and provide guidance on the definition, appointment,  composition, and report of the Shari’a supervisory board for ensuring compliance of the Islamic financial institution in all its dealings and transactions with Shari’a Rules and Principles. The main points are:

Definition of Shari’a Supervisory Board

2. A Shari’a supervisory board is an independent body of specialised jurists in Fiqh Al-Mua’malat (Islamic commercial jurisprudence). However, the Shari’a supervisory board may include a member other than those specialised in Fiqh Al-Mua’malat, but who should be an expert in the field of Islamic financial institutions and with knowledge of Fiqh Al- Mua’malat. The Shari’a supervisory board is entrusted with the duty of directing, reviewing and supervising the activities of the Islamic financial institution in order to ensure that they are in compliance with Shari’a Rules and Principles. The fatwas, and rulings of the Shari’a supervisory board shall be binding on the Islamic financial institution.

Appointment of Shari’a Supervisory Board and Fixing of Its Remuneration
3. Every Islamic financial institution shall have a Shari’a supervisory board to be appointed by the shareholders in their annual general meeting upon the recommendation of the board of directors taking into consideration the local legislation and regulations. Shareholders may authorise the board of directors to fix the remuneration of the Shari’a supervisory board.



885




Governance Standard No. (1):
Shari’a Supervisory Board: Appointment, Composition and Report

4. The Shari’a supervisory board and the Islamic financial institution should agree on the terms of the engagement. The agreed terms would need to be recorded in an appointment letter.

5. The Shari’a supervisory board should ensure that the Islamic financial institution documents and confirms the Shari’a supervisory board’s acceptance  of appointment. The letter of appointment of Shari’a supervisory boards should generally include reference to the compliance of the Islamic financial institution with Shari’a Rules and Principles.

6. The Shari’a supervisory board shall appoint from among its members or any other person a supervisor(s) to help it in performing its duties.

Composition, Selection and Dismissal of Shari’a Supervisory Board
7. The Shari’a supervisory board shall consist of at least three members.
The Shari’a supervisory board may seek the service of consultants who have expertise in business, economics, law, accounting and/or others. The Shari’a supervisory board should not include directors or significant shareholders of the Islamic financial institution.

8. The dismissal of a member  of the Shari’a supervisory board shall require a recommendation by the board of directors and be subject to the approval of the shareholders in a general meeting.

Basic Elements of the Shari’a Supervisory Board’s Report
9. The Shari’a supervisory board’s report should contain the following basic elements:

a) Title;
b) Addressee;
c) Opening or introductory paragraph;
d) Scope paragraph describing the nature of the work performed;
e) Opinion  paragraph containing an expression of opinion on the compliance of the Islamic financial institution with Shari’a Rules and Principles;
f) Date of report; and
g) Shari’a supervisory board’s signature.



886



Governance Standard No. (1):
Shari’a Supervisory Board: Appointment, Composition and Report

A measure of uniformity in the form and content of the Shari’a supervi- sory board’s report is desirable because it helps to promote the reader’s understanding and to identify unusual circumstances when they occur.

Title

10. The Shari’a supervisory board’s report should have an appropriate title.

The addressee of the Shari’a supervisory board’s report

11. The Shari’a supervisory board’s report should be appropriately addressed as required by the circumstances of the engagement and local laws and regulations.

Opening or introductory paragraph

12. The Shari’a supervisory board’s report should identify the purpose of the engagement.

Illustrative wording for an opening (introductory) paragraph is shown below:

“In compliance with the letter of appointment, we are required to submit the following report:

13. A scope paragraph should describe the nature of the work performed.

Illustrative wording for a scope paragraph is shown below:

“We have reviewed the principles and the contracts relating to the transactions and applications introduced by the Example Islamic Fi- nancial Institution during the period ended. We have also conduct- ed our review to form an opinion as to whether the Example Islamic Financial Institution has complied with Shari’a Rules and Principles and also with the specific fatwas, rulings and guidelines issued by us.”

Management’s responsibility
14. A clear statement that the management of the Islamic financial in- stitution is responsible for properly complying with Shari’a Rules and Principles.



887




Governance Standard No. (1):
Shari’a Supervisory Board: Appointment, Composition and Report

Illustrative wording for Shari’a statement is shown below:

“The Example Islamic Financial Institution’s management is responsible for ensuring that the financial institution conducts its business in accor- dance with Shari’a Rules and Principles. It is our responsibility to form an independent opinion, based on our review of the operations of the Example Islamic Financial Institution, and to report to you.”

Scope paragraph

15. Confirmation that the Shari’a supervisory board has performed ap- propriate tests, procedures and review work as appropriate.

16. Where appropriate, examining, on a test basis of each type of transaction, evidence to support that the transaction and dealings entered into by the respective Islamic financial institution are in compliance with the Shari’a Rules and Principles.

Illustrative wording to explain the review process is shown below:

“We conducted our review which included examining, on a test basis of each type of transaction, the relevant documentation and procedures adopted by the Example Islamic Financial Institution.

We planned and performed our review so as to obtain all the information and explanations which we considered necessary in order to provide us with sufficient evidence to give reasonable assurance that  the Example Islamic Financial Institution has not violated Shari’a Rules and Principles.”

17. Where appropriate, the report of the Shari’a supervisory board should include a clear statement  that the financial statements  have been examined for the appropriateness of the Shari’a basis of allocation of profit between the equity holders and the investment accountholders.
18. Where appropriate, the report of the Shari’a supervisory board should include a clear statement that all earnings that have been realized from sources or by means prohibited by Shari’a Rules and Principles have been disposed of to charitable causes.



888



Governance Standard No. (1):
Shari’a Supervisory Board: Appointment, Composition and Report

19. Where an Islamic financial institution prepares a Statement of Sources and Uses of Zakah and Charity Funds, the Shari’a supervisory board’s report should state whether the calculation of the Zakah is in compli- ance with Shari’a Rules and Principles.

Opinion paragraph
20. The Shari’a supervisory board’s report should state whether the Example Islamic Financial Institution’s contracts and related documentation are in compliance with the Shari’a Rules and Principles.

An illustration of these matters in the opinion paragraph is shown below:

In our opinion:
a) The contracts, transactions and dealings entered into by the Ex- ample Islamic Financial Institution during the year ended ... that we have reviewed are in compliance with the Shari’a Rules and Principles;
b) The allocation of profit and charging of losses relating to investment accounts conform to the basis that had been approved by us in accordance with Shari’a Rules and Principles;
(where appropriate, the opinion paragraph shall also include the following matters:)
c) All earnings that have been realized from sources or by means prohibited by Shari’a Rules and Principles have been disposed of to charitable causes; and
d) The calculation of Zakah is in compliance with Shari’a Rules and
Principles.
21. If the Shari’a supervisory board has ascertained that the management of the Islamic financial institution  has violated Shari’a Rules and Principles or the fatwas, ruling and guidelines issued by its Shari’a supervisory board, then the Shari’a supervisory board has to report the violations in the opinion paragraph of its report.

Date of report
22. The Shari’a supervisory board should state the period covered by its report and date the report as of the completion date of the review.



889




Governance Standard No. (1):
Shari’a Supervisory Board: Appointment, Composition and Report

23. The Shari’a supervisory board should not date the report earlier than the date on which the financial statements are signed or approved by management.

Shari’a supervisory board’s signature

24. The Shari’a supervisory board’s report should be signed by all members of the Board.

Publication of the Report of the Shari’a Supervisory Board

25. The report of the Shari’a supervisory board shall be published in the annual report of the Islamic financial institution.

Publication of Fatwas, Rulings and Guidelines of the Shari’a Supervisory
Board

26. It is recommended that the Islamic financial institution publishes the fatwas, rulings and guidelines issued by its Shari’a supervisory board during the year.

Effective Date

27. This standard shall be effective for the financial statements for the financial periods beginning 1 Muharram  1419 A.H. or 1 January
1999 A.D.

























890



Governance Standard No. (1):
Shari’a Supervisory Board: Appointment, Composition and Report





Adoption of the standard


The standard of Shari’a Supervisory Board: Appointment, Composition and Report was adopted by the Accounting and Auditing Standards Board in its meeting No. (13) held on 10-11 Safar 1418 A.H., corresponding to
15-16 June 1997 A.D.











































891




Governance Standard No. (1):
Shari’a Supervisory Board: Appointment, Composition and Report





Appendix
Example Report of
Shari’a Supervisory Board




In the Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful

To the Shareholders of the Example Islamic Financial Institution

Assalamu Alaykum Wa Rahmatu Allah Wa Barakatuh

In compliance with the letter of appointment, we are required to submit the following report:

We have reviewed the principles and the contracts relating to the transactions  and applications introduced  by the Example Islamic Financial Institution during the period ended. We have also conducted our review to form an opinion as to whether the Example Islamic Financial Institution has complied with Shari’a Rules and Principles and also with the specific fatwas, rulings and guidelines issued by us.

The Example Islamic Financial Institution’s management is re- sponsible for ensuring that the financial institution conducts its business in accordance with Shari’a Rules and Principles. It is our responsibility to form an independent  opinion, based on our review of the operations of the Example Islamic Financial Institution, and to report to you.

We conducted our review which included examining, on a test basis of each type of transaction, the relevant documentation and procedures adopted by the Example Islamic Financial Institution.






892



Governance Standard No. (1):
Shari’a Supervisory Board: Appointment, Composition and Report


We planned and performed our review so as to obtain all the information and explanations which we considered necessary in order to provide us with sufficient evidence to give reasonable assurance that the Example Islamic Financial Institution has not violated Shari’a Rules and Principles.

In our opinion:

a) The contracts, transactions and dealings entered into by the
Example Islamic Financial Institution during the year ended
... that we have reviewed are in compliance with the Shari’a
Rules and Principles;
b) The allocation of profit and charging of losses relating to investment  accounts  conform  to the basis that  had  been approved by us in accordance with Shari’a Rules and Prin- ciples;
(where appropriate, the opinion paragraph shall also include the following matters:)
c) All earnings that have been realized from sources or by means prohibited by Shari’a Rules and Principles have been disposed of to charitable causes; and
d) The calculation of Zakah is in compliance with Shari’a Rules and Principles.
We beg Allah the Almighty to grant us all the success and straight- forwardness.

Wassalamu Alaykum Wa Rahmatu Allah Wa Barakatuh

(Names and signature of the members of the Shari’a supervisory board)

Place and Date









893

