





















Financial Accounting Standard No. (18)



Islamic Financial Services Offered by

Conventional Financial Institutions












Contents



Subject                                                                        Para.    Page

Islamic Financial Services Offered by Conventional Financial
Institutions
Preface .................................................................................                          597
Statement of the Standard...................................................     (1-17)         598
1. Scope of the Standard ..........................................................  (1)            598
2. General Provisions ...............................................................  (2)            598
3. Institutions    Offering   Islamic    Financial    Services
Through Branches Either Have Separate or Non-Sepa-
rate Accounts from Conventional Branches...................      (3)            598
4. Institutions Managing Islamic Investments Funds ..........       (4)            599
5. Institutions Offering  Islamic Financial Services  Which Have Separate or Non-Separate Accounts for Them, Either Directly Through Conventional Departments or Through
Separate Islamic Financial Services Units.............................  (5-8)          599
6. General Requirements .........................................................     (9-10)         600
7. Disclosure Requirements.....................................................     (11-16)        600
8. Effective Date ........................................................................ (17)           601
Adoption of the Standard....................................................                         602
Appendix (a):  Brief History of the Preparation of the
Standard..............................................................                   603
Appendix (b):  Reasons for the Standard..................................                      605
Appendix (c):  Basis for Conclusions........................................                     607













595












Preface


This standard has the objective of setting out the accounting rules for recognizing, measuring  and  presenting  the assets managed  and  funds mobilized on the basis of the Shari’a rules and principles in the financial statements of conventional financial institutions(1) that offer Islamic financial services, as well as the income generated from these services. The standard also determines the necessary disclosures related to these services.


































(1) These are financial institutions which do not comply with the Shari’a rules and principles in all of their transactions. They are referred to hereafter as institution or institutions.



597




Financial Accounting Standard No. (18):
Islamic Financial Services Offered by Conventional Financial Institutions





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard shall apply to the institutions which offer Islamic financial services in addition to their conventional financial services. This standard sets out the accounting rules only for the Islamic financial services offered by these institutions. (para. 1)

2. General Provisions

Institutions that offer Islamic financial services adopt different organiza- tional and administrative arrangements as follows:

2/1 Offering Islamic financial services through a branch or number of branches that have either separate or non-separate accounts from their conventional branches.

2/2 Offering Islamic financial services through Islamic investment funds.

2/3 Offering Islamic financial services through  one or more Islamic financial services units whose accounts are either separate or non- separate from those of other (conventional) units.

2/4 Offering Islamic financial services through  existing conventional units with no separation between the two practices. (para. 2)

3. Institutions Offering Islamic Financial Services Through Branches Either Have Separate or Non-Separate Accounts from Conventional Branches
Institutions  offering Islamic financial services through  a branch  or a number of branches that have separate accounts from their conven- tional branches shall group those branches offering Islamic financial services together for financial reporting  purposes and shall prepare a consolidated  supplementary  set of financial  statement  for those branches as a group, based on the financial accounting standards  is-



598




Financial Accounting Standard No. (18):
Islamic Financial Services Offered by Conventional Financial Institutions

sued by the Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Finan- cial Institutions  (AAOIFI). These supplementary financial statements shall be published as an appendix in the notes to the financial state- ments of the institution. (para. 3)

4. Institutions Managing Islamic Investments Funds

Institutions managing Islamic investment funds shall apply the accounting standards issued by AAOIFI and particularly the Financial Accounting Standard No. (14): Investment Funds. (para. 4)

5. Institutions Offering Islamic Financial Services, Which Have Separate or Non-Separate Accounts for Such Services, Either Directly Through Conventional Departments or Through Separate Islamic Financial Services Units:
5/1 shall apply to the Islamic financial services the rules governing income recognition  and measurement  as stated in the Financial Accounting Standards issued by AAOIFI. Detailed disclosure shall be made in the notes to the financial statements  of these rules. (para. 5)

5/2 shall prepare a separate supplementary statement to be published in the notes to the financial statements, which shows in detail the funds mobilized according to Shari’a rules and principles and the assets financed by these funds. (para. 6)

5/3 shall prepare a separate supplementary statement to be published in the notes to the financial statements, which shows in detail the income  and  expenses (including  provisions)  related  to  Islamic financial services offered by the institution. (para. 7)
5/4 shall disclose in the notes to the financial statements any accounting policies adopted in the recognition, measurement and presentation of the assets and liabilities related to Islamic financial services that are neither in accordance with nor specified in Financial Accounting Standards issued by AAOIFI. Disclosure shall also be made of the nature of such assets and liabilities. (para. 8)



599




Financial Accounting Standard No. (18):
Islamic Financial Services Offered by Conventional Financial Institutions

6. General Requirements

6/1 Institutions offering Islamic financial services shall declare that such services are in compliance with Shari’a requirements, and are therefore required to:
a) Appoint a Shari’a supervisory board which shall present a Shari’a report; and
b) Implement the Governance Standards issued by AAOIFI that relate to the Shari’a supervisory board. (para. 9)
6/2 In the exceptional cases where the institution does not appoint a Shari’a Supervisory Board, which shall be with the approval of the regulatory and supervisory bodies, the institution shall disclose the following:
a) Reasons for not appointing a Shari’a Supervisory Board.
b) How the institution shall comply with Shari’a rules and principles in implementing the financial services it offers.
c) The body that approves the services offered in (b) above. (para. 10)

7. Disclosure Requirements

7/1 Institutions  shall disclose whether or not they commingle funds relating to Islamic financial services with funds relating to conven- tional financial services. (para. 11)

7/2 Institutions shall disclose, in detail, the sources and applications of funds mobilised and invested by their Islamic financial services and the sources of funds used to cover a deficit if it occurs. (para. 12)

7/3 Institutions shall disclose any revenues or expenditures prohibited by Shari’a rules and principles related to funds mobilized according to Shari’a rules and principles, and the disposition of any of such revenues. The latter shall be determined by the Shari’a supervisory board. (para. 13)

7/4 Institutions  shall disclose any reserves deducted from the funds mobilized according to Shari’a rules and principles, the purposes of such reserves and to whom these reserves shall revert to in case the activities, in respect of which such reserves were deducted, have
ceased. (para. 14)



600




Financial Accounting Standard No. (18):
Islamic Financial Services Offered by Conventional Financial Institutions

7/5 Institutions shall disclose the percentage amount of the funds relating to Islamic financial services in comparison to the percentage amount of funds relating to conventional financial services. (para. 15)

7/6 The disclosure requirements stated in Financial Accounting Stan- dard No. (1) General Presentation and Disclosure in the Financial Statements of Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions  should be observed. (para. 16)

8. Effective Date
This Standard shall be effective for financial periods beginning 1 Mu- harram, 1424 A.H. or 1 January, 2003 A.D. (para. 17)








































601




Financial Accounting Standard No. (18):
Islamic Financial Services Offered by Conventional Financial Institutions





Adoption of the Standard


The Standard  of Islamic Financial Services Offered by Convention- al Financial Institutions  was adopted  by the Accounting  and Auditing Standards  Board in its meeting No. (23) held on 17 Safar, 1423 A.H., corresponding  to 30 April, 2002 A.D.

Members of the Board
1. Abdul-Malik Yousef Al-Hamar                         Chairman
2. Noorur-Rahman Abid                                      Deputy Chairman
3. Ibrahim Adam Habib
4. Anwar Khalifa Sadah
5. Jamil Ismail Darras
6. Dr. Khalid Mohammed Boudi
7. Dr. Sayed Musa Al-Habshi
8. Dr. Abdul-Sattar Abu Ghuddah
9. Abdul-Hamid Abu Mousa
10. Dr. Abdul-Samad Bin Hj. Alias
11. Mohammed Alawi Thiban
12. Musa Abdel-Aziz Shehadeh
13. Dr. Yousif Mohammed Mahmood Qassim




















602




Financial Accounting Standard No. (18):
Islamic Financial Services Offered by Conventional Financial Institutions





Appendix (A)
Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (16) held in Jeddah in Saudi Arabia on 8-9 Ramadan,
1419 A.H., corresponding to 26-27 December, 1998 A.D., the Accounting and Auditing Standards Board decided to give priority to the preparation of a standard on Islamic Banking Services Offered by Conventional Financial Institutions.

On 1 Ramadan, 1421 A.H., corresponding to 27 November, 2000 A.D., a consultant  was commissioned to prepare a preliminary study on the accounting aspects of the standard.

In its meeting No. (27) held in Jordan on 7-8 Muharram, 1422 A.H., corresponding to 1-2 April, 2001 A.D., the Accounting Standards Committee discussed the preliminary study and  made necessary amendments. The Committee also discussed the revised accounting study and the exposure draft of the standard in its meeting No. (28) held in Bahrain on 9 Safar, 1422 A.H., corresponding to 2 May, 2001 A.D., and requested the consultants to make the necessary amendments in light of the comments made by the members.

The revised exposure draftof the standard was discussedby theAccounting
Standards Committee meeting No. (29) held in Bahrain on 3, Rabi’ I, 1422
A.H., corresponding to 26 May, 2001 A.D., and necessary amendments were made. The Accounting Standards Committee also discussed the revised exposure draft of the standard in its meeting No. (30) held in Jordan on 14
Jumada II, 1422 A.H., corresponding to 2 September, 2001 A.D., and further amendments were made.
The exposure draft of the standard was discussed by the Shari’a Committee for Standards in its meeting No. (6) held in Jordan on 16 Jumada II, 1422 A.H.,



603




Financial Accounting Standard No. (18):
Islamic Financial Services Offered by Conventional Financial Institutions

corresponding to 4 September 2001 A.D., and some additional amendments were made.

The amended exposure draft was discussed in the Accounting and Auditing Standards Board meeting No. (22) held in Bahrain on 19-20 Rajab 1422 A.H., corresponding to 7-8 October 2001 A.D. The Accounting and Auditing Standards Board made some amendments to the exposure draft and decided that it should be distributed to specialists and interested parties to obtain their comments on the exposure draft in order to discuss them in a listening session.

A listening session was held in Bahrain on 22 Dhul-Qa’dah 1422 A.H., corresponding to 4 February 2002 A.D. The listening session was attended by more than 20 participants representing central banks, Islamic banks, accounting firms, Shari’a scholars, academics and others who are interested in this field. Members of the Accounting Standards Committee responded in the listening session to the written comments as well as to the oral comments that were expressed in the listening session.

The Accounting Standards Committee held a meeting on 22 Dhul-Qa’dah
1422 A.H., corresponding to 4 February 2002 A.D., in Bahrain to discuss the comments made on the exposure draft. The Committee made the necessary amendments, which it deemed necessary in light of the discussions that took place in the listening session.
The Accounting and Auditing Standards Board adopted the proposed standard in its meeting No. (23) held in Bahrain on 17 Safar 1423 A.H., corresponding to 30 April 2002 A.D.


















604




Financial Accounting Standard No. (18):
Islamic Financial Services Offered by Conventional Financial Institutions





Appendix (B)
Reasons for the Standard


Islamic financial services are no longer restricted only to Islamic financial institutions.  Rather,  these  services are offered  by a large number  of institutions that do not comply with Shari’a rules and principles in all their transactions. This was revealed by a study carried out for the purpose of preparing this standard. These institutions differ in the ways, structures, forms and the Shari’a basis of the Islamic financial products which they provide. Some of these institutions provide Islamic financial services through Islamic investment funds. Others provide Islamic banking services through Islamic branches. Yet another group of these institutions uses interest-based deposits to provide finance to clients using Islamic instruments.

The study has also revealed that the size of the existing assets that are managed using Islamic financial instruments  in these institutions  is significant compared to the total assets of the institutions. A sample in the study that included five institutions showed that the percentage of Islamic funds compared to the total assets of these institutions  ranged between
20% to 40%.

The study also revealed that there are differences in the Shari’a rules used by these institutions and that they have no Shari’a supervisory board. Instead, they depend on the Shari’a rulings of the Shari’a supervisory boards of other Islamic financial institutions. Furthermore, these institutions do not disclose the Shari’a rules which they follow in providing their Islamic financial services.
Although these institutions have been providing Islamic financial services for a period of time which has resulted in an accumulation of funds that are invested according to Shari’a rules and principles, they have not made adequate disclosure of their Islamic operations in their annual reports. The



605




Financial Accounting Standard No. (18):
Islamic Financial Services Offered by Conventional Financial Institutions

study revealed that some of these institutions had never disclosed their Islamic transactions, while others disclosed information in the notes to the financial statements which was no more than a general reference to the transactions without any disclosure of their Shari’a basis and/or accounting
policies.


















































606




Financial Accounting Standard No. (18):
Islamic Financial Services Offered by Conventional Financial Institutions





Appendix (C)
Basis for Conclusions


The conclusions reached by this standard  mainly emanate from the application of the objectives of financial reports and the concepts of financial accounting for Islamic financial institutions on the companies to the extent applicable. Such objectives are geared to the needs of the categories of the users of such reports as specified in the previous Statement of Financial Accounting No. (1): Objectives of Financial Accounting for Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions, and the previous Statement of Financial Accounting No. (2): Concepts of Financial Accounting for Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions (referred to hereafter as the Statement of Objectives and the Statement of Concepts, respectively).

The previous Statement of Objectives states that financial reports should provide information about the Islamic bank’s compliance with the precepts of Shari’a in its dealings and operations. As some conventional financial institutions provide Islamic financial services, and have declared that such services are in compliance with Shari’a requirements, they have to observe both the previous Statements of Objectives and the previous Statements of Concepts. Accordingly, this standard requires these institutions to appoint a Shari’a supervisory board  and  implement  the Governance Standards issued by AAOIFI.
The standard also requires disclosure of any revenues or expenditure related to Islamic financial services that are prohibited  by Shari’a  rules and principles, disclosure of the commingling of funds related to Islamic transactions with funds related to conventional transactions, and disclosure of the percentage amount of funds relating to Islamic transactions compared to  the  percentage amount  of funds  relating  to  conventional  financial services. The standard also requires disclosure of the reserves deducted



607




Financial Accounting Standard No. (18):
Islamic Financial Services Offered by Conventional Financial Institutions

from funds mobilized in accordance with Shari’a rules and principles and to whom such funds revert in case the activities, for which such reserves were deducted, have ceased.

The previous Statement of Objectives also states that financial reports should  provide  information  to  assist  in  evaluating  ability to  sustain losses, bear risks, assess risks inherent in assets and the degree of their liquidity. Accordingly, this standard requires the preparation of a separate supplementary statement  to be published in the notes to the financial statements which shows in detail the funds mobilized according to Shari’a rules and principles and the assets financed by these funds. The standard also requires the preparation of a separate supplementary statement to be published in the notes to the financial statements which shows income and expenses (including provisions) relating to Islamic financial services offered by the institution. This is applicable to financial institutions offering Islamic financial services which adopt organizational and administrative arrangement that do not separate the accounts of Islamic financial services from their conventional financial services.
The previous Statement  of Concepts  states the  concepts governing accounting  recognition  and  measurement  of assets, income, expenses, gains and losses. Accordingly, this standard requires the recognition and measurement of assets and income according to the accounting policies for recognition and measurement stated in the Islamic accounting standards issued by the Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial Institutions  and the detailed disclosure of these policies in the notes to financial statements.















608
