
























Financial Accounting Standard No. (27)



Investment accounts












Introduction


Investment accounts are a key component of the financial statements of Islamic Financial Institutions. The previous Financial Accounting Standard No. (5): Disclosures of Bases for Profit Allocation Between Owners’ Equity and Investment Accountholders issued by the Accounting and Auditing Standards Board in its meeting No. (11) held on 19-20 May 1996 A.D., and the previous Financial Accounting Standard No. (6): Equity of Investment Accountholders and Their Equivalent approved by the Board on 15-16
June 1997 A.D., have been combined into this one standard to deal with the accounting principles and concepts relative to investment accounts.
The previous FAS No. (5) and FAS No. (6) have been replaced by this standard  in view of the new Conceptual Framework and  also to take cognisance of the emerging issues in Islamic finance, accounting, reporting and disclosure practices.




























791












Contents



Subject                                                                                      Page

Investment accounts
Introduction .........................................................................................         791
Preface ..................................................................................................         795
Statement of the Standard....................................................................        796
1. Scope of the Standard ............................................................................. 796
2. Definition..................................................................................................   796
3. Recognition, De-recognition and Measurement.................................     798
4. Impairment Attributable to Investment Accounts..............................     799
5. Presentation and Disclosure Requirements.........................................    800
6. Effective Date and Transitional Provisions ..........................................    802
Adoption of the Standard.....................................................................        803
Appendix (a):  Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard .............      804
Appendix (b):  Basis for Conclusions...........................................................  806
























793












Preface


This standard sets out the principles for accounting recognition, mea- surement, presentation and disclosure of investment accounts which form an integral part of the financial statements of Islamic Financial Institutions, particularly Islamic Banks.











































795





Financial Accounting Standard No. (27): Investment Accounts





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard
1/1 This standard shall apply to on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet, unrestricted and restricted investment accounts managed by Islamic Financial Institutions.

The following are included within the scope of this standard:
a) Investment accounts based on Mudaraba contracts which represent “equity of investment accountholders” as defined by the Conceptual Framework; and
b) Investment accounts that are based on Mudaraba contracts that are placed on “short-term  basis” (overnight, seven days, one- month basis) by other financial institutions as “interbank-bank deposits” for the purpose of liquidity management. (para. 1)
1/2 This standard  shall not  be applicable to the following financial instruments or contracts:
a) Own equity instruments;
b) Wakala contracts;
c) Reverse Murabaha or other similar contracts;
d) Musharaka based or other similar contracts; or e) Sukuk. (para. 2)
1/3 Should the requirements of this standard be in conflict with the entity’s charter or the laws and regulations of the country in which it operates, a disclosure should be made of the conflict. (para. 3)

2. Definitions
2/1 An investment account is defined as an account for the holder of an instrument  under  a Mudaraba  or its equivalent representing funds received by the Islamic Financial Institution for investment on behalf of the other party (rab-al-mal) with or without conditions as regards how the funds may be invested. (para. 4)



796





Financial Accounting Standard No. (27): Investment Accounts

2/2 Profit sharing Mudaraba based investment accounts that provide authority over decisions with regards to the use of and deployment of the funds received by the Islamic Financial Institution are treated as equity of investment accountholders and presented as an on- balance sheet item in the financial statement of Islamic Financial Institution. (para. 5)

Profit sharing Mudaraba based investment accounts that do not provide authority  over decisions with regards to the use of and deployment of the funds received by the Islamic Financial Institution are treated as equity of investment accountholders and presented as an off-balance sheet item in the financial statement of Islamic Financial Institution. (para. 6)

All other instruments that exhibit features of an investment account shall be presented as either on-balance sheet or off-balance sheet using the above criteria. (para. 7)

2/3 Restricted investment accounts under Mudaraba arrangements shall be presented as on-balance sheet investment accounts if they meet the following conditions:
a) Islamic Financial Institution has the authority over decisions with regard to the use of and deployment of the funds it has received; or
b) If after taking into account all available evidences, past practices are deemed to give rise to an assertion that the accounts have risk characteristics similar to an on-balance sheet investment accounts from the point of view of the Islamic Financial Institution receiving the funds. (para. 8)
2/4 For the purpose of paragraph (7), evidence include, practices such as return the available funds, frequent transfers of funds between owners accounts or on-balance sheet investment accounts, investments being made jointly together with the Islamic Financial Institution, and return of funds to investment accountholders at amounts that are in excess of their cash equivalent value. (para. 9)



797





Financial Accounting Standard No. (27): Investment Accounts

3. Recognition, De-recognition and Measurement
3/1 When an investment account is recognised initially, the Islamic Finan- cial Institution shall recognise it at the fair value of the consideration received at the date on which the contract becomes effective. (para. 10)

3/2 Investment accounts are recognised when they satisfy the following criteria:
a) Cash or cash equivalent has been received by the Islamic Financial Institution under legally enforceable Mudaraba or other similar contract; and
b) There are no preconditions to the contract  becoming  valid. (para. 11)
3/3 Investment accounts are derecognised when they satisfy the following criteria:
a) Cash or cash equivalents has been returned by the Islamic Financial
Institution;
b) The fair value can be determined with reasonable certainty; and c) Mudaraba or similar contract is terminated  and there are no
further legally enforceable obligations. (para. 12)
3/4 If Mudaraba or similar contract is revoked due to non-fulfilment of one of its terms and conditions by the Islamic Financial Institution, the funds remain with the Islamic Financial Institution on trust and shall be shown separately until returned. (para. 13)

3/5 On initial recognition, the investment account shall be presented as either on-balance sheet or off-balance sheet account in accordance with paragraph (5) to paragraph (8). (para. 14)

3/6 After initial recognition, subsequent measurement  of investment accounts shall take into account undistributed  profits, profit equalisation reserves or other special reserves created specifically for the account of investment  accountholders  less any losses on assets attributable to investment accountholders. (para. 15)

3/7 Unpaid or undistributed profits or gains, after allocation of profits to Islamic Financial Institution  as Mudarib  or  equivalent, shall



798





Financial Accounting Standard No. (27): Investment Accounts

be set aside for future distribution  and added to the value of the corresponding investment accounts and shall not be combined with retained earnings belonging to owners. (para. 16)

3/8 Accumulated losses associated with assets attributable to investment accounts shall be deducted from the aggregate value of the corresponding investment accounts. (para. 17)

3/9 Assets  and  liabilities  relating  to  equity  of  off-balance  sheet accountholders and their equivalent shall be presented separately from  the  Islamic  Financial  Institution’s  assets  and  liabilities. (para. 18)

4. Impairment Attributable to Investment Accounts
4/1 Impairment losses attributable to the assets corresponding to the investment accounts shall be taken to the income statement if they are attributable to on-balance sheet investment accounts or to the separate income account of the off-balance sheet investment accounts if they belong to off-balance sheet investment accounts. (para. 19)

4/2 Loss resulting from transactions in a jointly financed investment (that is recognised during a period other than that in which final settlement  of the  investment  accounts  is made)  should  in  the first instance be deducted from any undistributed  profits on the investment. Any such loss in excess of the amount of undistributed profits should be deducted from the respective equity shares in the joint investment of the Islamic Financial Institution  and the unrestricted investment accountholders, according to each party’s contribution to the joint investment. (para. 20)

4/3 Loss due to misconduct or negligence on the part of the Islamic Financial Institution, based on the opinion of the Shari’a supervisory board of the Islamic Financial Institution, shall be deducted from the Islamic Financial Institution’s share in the profits of the jointly financed investment. In case the loss exceeds the Islamic Financial Institution’s share of profits, the difference should be deducted from its equity share in the joint investment, if any, or recognized as due from the Islamic Financial Institution. (para. 21)



799





Financial Accounting Standard No. (27): Investment Accounts

5. Presentation and Disclosure Requirements

5/1 Investment accounts

5/1/1 Equity of on-balance sheet investment accountholders shall be presented as an independent category in the statement of financial position of the Islamic Financial Institution between liabilities and owners’ equity. (para. 22)

5/1/2 Information   on  equity  of  off-balance  sheet  investment accountholders shall be presented in the statement of changes in off-balance sheet investment account and their equivalent or at the footnotes of the statement  of financial position. (para. 23)

5/1/3 Disclosure should  be made, in  the  notes  to  the  financial statements  on  the  significant  accounting  policies and  of the bases applied by the Islamic Financial Institution in the allocation of profits between owners’ equity and investment accountholders. (para. 24)

5/1/4 Disclosure  should  be made  in the  notes  to the  financial statements  on significant accounting  policies, of the bases applied  by the  Islamic Financial  Institution  for charging provisions, and the parties to whom they revert once they are no longer required. (para. 25)

5/1/5 Disclosure should be made of the total administrative expenses charged to investment accounts along with a brief description of their major components based on the material significance of the amounts. (para. 26)
5/1/6 Disclosure should be made of the percentage for profit allocation between owner’s equity and various investment accountholders which the  Islamic Financial Institution  has applied in  the current financial period. When the Islamic Financial Institution has a number of different types of investment account involving different contractual conditions, the required disclosure applies



800





Financial Accounting Standard No. (27): Investment Accounts

to such type of accounts only when the total amount by type of account is of material significance. (para. 27)

5/1/7 Disclosure should be made if the Islamic Financial Institution has increased its percentage of profits as a Mudarib, after fulfilling the necessary Shari’a requirements, during the financial period. (para. 28)

5/1/8 Disclosure should be made of whether the Islamic Financial Institution has included investment accounts in the sharing of profit resulting from investing current accounts funds or any other funds (which the Islamic Financial Institution did not receive on the basis of a Mudaraba contract). Disclosure should also be made of the bases that have been applied. (para. 29)

5/1/9 Disclosure  should  be  made  as  to  whether  the  Islamic Financial  Institution   has  included   investment   accounts in the sharing of revenue from banking  operations.  If so, the types of such revenue and the bases applied should be disclosed. (para. 30)

5/1/10 In cases where the Islamic Financial Institution is unable to utilize all funds available for investing, disclosure should be made of which of the two parties (owners’ equity or investment accountholders) was given priority. (para. 31)

5/1/11 Disclosure  should  be  made,  in  the  notes  on  significant accounts, of the percentage of the funds of investment accountholders  which the Islamic Financial Institution  has agreed with them to invest in order to produce returns for them. (para. 32)

5/2 Incentive profits

5/2/1 Disclosure should be made of the bases applied by the Islamic Financial Institution  for determining  the incentive profits which it receives from the profits of investment accounts if such profits are of material significance. (para. 33)



801





Financial Accounting Standard No. (27): Investment Accounts

5/3 Provisions and reserves

The following provisions and  reserves shall be disclosed in the financial statements of Islamic Financial Institution:
a) Specific provisions – estimate of impairment on specific assets. b) General provisions toward potential loss.
c) Profit equalisation reserve to help maintain  a certain level of income for investment accountholders.
d) Investmentrisk reserve forfuture investment losses for investment accountholders. (para. 34)
5/4 General disclosure requirements

The disclosure requirements stated in Financial Accounting Standard No.  (1):  General  Presentation  and  Disclosure in  the  Financial Statements of Islamic Financial Institutions  should be observed. (para. 35)

6. Effective Date and Transitional Provisions

6/1 This standard shall be effective for financial periods beginning 1
January 2016 A.D. (para. 36)

6/2 This standard shall be applied retroactively in accordance with the requirements  stated  in  Financial Accounting  Standard  No. (1): General Presentation and Disclosure in the Financial Statements of Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions. (para. 37)





















802





Financial Accounting Standard No. (27): Investment Accounts





Adoption of the Standard


The Standard of Investment Accounts was adopted by the Accounting and Auditing Standards Board on 16 Muharram 1436 A.H., corresponding to 9 November 2014 A.D.

Members of the Board
1. Mr. Hamad Abdulla Eqab                                             Chairman
2. Sheikh Dr. Abdul Sattar Abu-Ghuddah
3. Sheikh Essam Mohammed Ishaq
4. Mr. Jalil Al-Aali
5. Mr. Jamil A Darras
6. Mr. Fawad Laique
7. Dr. Nordin Mohd Zain / Mr. Aly El Azhary
8. Mr. Firas S Hamdan
9. Dr. Hussein Said Saifan
10. Mr. M Faiz Azmi / Mr. Madhukar Shenoy
11. Mr. Qudeer Latif
12. Mr. Oliver Agha
13. Dr. Hamed Hassan Merah                     Member/ Secretary General/ Rapparteur




















803





Financial Accounting Standard No. (27): Investment Accounts





Appendix (A)
Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (37) held in Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain on 10
Sha’ban 1431 A.H., corresponding to 22 July 2010 A.D., the Accounting and  Auditing  Standard  Board decided to  develop a new Standard  on Investment Accounts.

Subsequently, a consultant was commissioned to prepare a preliminary study and exposure draft of the Standard on Investment Accounts. Preparation of the preliminary study and exposure draft was overseen by the Accounting and Auditing Standards Board.

The  preliminary  study  and  exposure  draft  were discussed by  the Accounting and Auditing Standards Board through a series of meetings and telephone conference calls.

The preliminary study and exposure draft were deliberated by Accounting and Auditing Standard Board in its meeting No. (38) held on 10 Sha’ban
1431 A.H., corresponding to 2 December 2010 A.D. Subsequent exposure draft was also deliberated by Accounting and Auditing Standard Board in its meeting No. (39) held on 21 Rajab 1432 A.H., corresponding to 23 June
2011 A.D.

Listening session of the  exposure draft  was convened in  Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain on 29 Rabi’ II, 1433 A.H., corresponding to 22 March
2012 A.D. to gather comments from the Islamic finance industry as well as accounting and auditing professions.

The exposure draft was deliberated again by Accounting and Auditing Standard Board in its meeting No. (40) held on 1 Sha’ban 1433 A.H., corre- sponding to 21 June 2012 A.D., and then approved in its meeting No. (41) held on 22 Muharram 1434 A.H., corresponding to 6 December 2012 A.D.



804





Financial Accounting Standard No. (27): Investment Accounts

Subsequent to the approval of the exposure draft by the Accounting and Auditing Standard Board, the Accounting and Auditing Standards Board held further discussions and recommended further changes relating to the scope of the draft standard.

A revised draft standard was prepared and discussed by the Accounting and Auditing Standards Board through a series of meetings and telephone conference calls.

The revised draft standard was submitted to the Accounting and Auditing
Standard Board by circulation, and ultimately approved on 16 Muharram
1436 A.H., corresponding to 9 November 2014 A.D.








































805





Financial Accounting Standard No. (27): Investment Accounts





Appendix (B)
Basis for Conclusions


Rationale
The Accounting and Auditing Standards Board considered the need to revise the following previous standards:
a) Financial Accounting Standard No. (5): Disclosure of Bases of Profit Allocation between Owners’ Equity and Investment Accountholders; and
b) Financial Accounting Standard No. (6): Equity of Investment Accoun- tholders and their Equivalent.
The above previous standards, FAS No. (5) and FAS No. (6), require a modification on account of the following:
a) The changes reflected in the Conceptual Framework that replaced the previous Statement of Financial Accounting No. (1): Objectives of Financial Accounting for Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions, and Statement of Financial Accounting No. (2): Concepts of Financial Accounting for Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions;
b) The fiduciary nature of the relationships thatexists betweenanIslamic Financial Institution, its owners’ and its investment accountholders. The level of disclosures should be based on the fact that the risk is borne by the investment accountholders in legal form although in many instances the Islamic Financial Institution  does absorb or assume losses attributable to the investment accountholders.
The disclosure should be based on significance of transaction, event or condition affecting the investment accountholders rather than the owners of the Islamic Financial Institution. A predominant part of capital is thus provided by investment accountholders at their own risk;
c) The fact that some Islamic Financial Institutions  have in practice
foregone some of their profits or capital to shore up the values of the



806





Financial Accounting Standard No. (27): Investment Accounts

investment accountholder’s funds, means that there is a significant element of disparity between legal form and substance of the risks appearing to be taken on or assumed by investment accountholders;
d) The  industry  has  witnessed  instances  of  accounting  arbitrage particularly, within  the  context  of on-balance  versus off-balance sheet considerations which AAOIFI must address;
e) There is a need to distinguish between “equity of investment accoun- tholders” which refer to funds managed on the basis of Mudaraba contracts versus funds received on the basis of Wakala contracts in view of the definition of equity of investment accounts within the Conceptual Framework; and
f) The  relationship  between Islamic Financial Institutions  and  the parties that deal with them differs from the relationship of those who deal with conventional entities. Accordingly, the financial reports of Islamic Financial Institutions  must, therefore, reflect the nature of the relationships. The information needs of the common users of financial reports of Islamic Financial Institution,  thus, are unique and specific.
The Board decided that as both FAS No. (5) and FAS No. (6) deal with investment accounts, there was merit in combining the two standards to reduce overlap as well as enhance clarity of the standards.

Investment Accounts

Within the Conceptual Framework, the important consideration relevant to on-balance sheet/off-balance sheet treatment of investment accounts is not the mere designation from a legal or Shari’a standpoint, but the Islamic Fi- nancial Institution’s ability to exercise free authority with regard to decisions regarding investment and deployment of the investment accountholder’s funds.
Mudaraba contracts are considered as equity of investment accountholders and also further considered for accounting recognition purposes between equity of investment accounts considered for on-balance sheet treatment and equity of investment accountholders considered off-balance sheet.



807





Financial Accounting Standard No. (27): Investment Accounts

Regulatory and Capital Adequacy Implications

An important matter relevant to investment accounts is the regulatory implication that is associated with the designation of accounts as “investment accounts” or for that matter as on-balance sheet accounts or off-balance sheet accounts. A predominant part of the on-balance sheet investment accounts are equated to “customer deposits” for the purpose of the prudential banking regulation.

Additionally, the accounting rules will, partially, determine how certain prudential ratios are considered by banking regulators – for instance, cash reserve ratio and loans to deposit ratios are linked to the aggregate amount of deposits held. Furthermore, the deposits retained on the balance sheet have an impact on the capital adequacy ratio computations  both under the conventional Basel II prudential norms as well as under the Islamic Financial Services Board principles.

Yet another related issue is the applicability of deposit protection schemes.

The Board noted these important issues and felt that users of the standard take account of these important implications in dealing with any overlap or conflict between accounting principles and regulatory considerations. Regulators are important users of general purpose financial statements and any regulatory implication must be respected.

Presentation Considerations
The scope of the standard extends to all Mudaraba contracts involving receipt  of  funds  by  an  Islamic  Financial  Institution for  investment purposes.  While a predominant part of this form of activity is related to  “customer   deposits”  equivalents  in  the  banking  industry,   there would be transactions  involving interbank  investments  for short-term as in money market  transactions  particularly  within banking  context; i.e., investment  accounts  that  are based on  Mudaraba  contracts  that placed on a “short-term basis” (overnight,  7 days, or 30 day basis) by other financial institutions as “inter-bank  deposits” for the purpose  of liquidity management.



808





Financial Accounting Standard No. (27): Investment Accounts

Unrestricted Investment Accounts And Restricted Investment Accounts
Unrestricted investment accounts and restricted investment accounts are defined in the relevant Shari’a standards of AAOIFI. Previously, designation of investment accounts between these two categories determined the on- balance sheet versus off-balance sheet treatments. Unrestricted investment accounts are quite likely to be on-balance sheet since the Islamic Financial Institution  is expected to have free authority  and discretion as regards where, when and how the funds are to be invested.

Restricted investment accounts are likely to be considered off-balance sheet. The acid test under the Conceptual Framework will be the ability of the Mudarib to exercise authority over decisions with regard to the use of and deployment of funds, thus introducing a substance approach rather than legal form approach to accounting recognition.

Jointly Financed Investments
The previous standard required separate classification requirements for the portion of investment jointly financed by the investment accountholders. The Board noted that this conceptually created two basis of accounting for the same investment. It was concluded that this standard shall not provide different classification or measurement criteria for investments based on its source of funding. However, the Board noted that consistent with the requirements of FAS No. (1), each entity should provide the disclosures of the sources of funding of its assets.

Further,  the  Board considered concerns  where different accounting policies followed by different entities for similar jointly financed investments may lead to different basis of profit allocation and distributions to investment accountholders.














809

