
























Financial Accounting Standard No. (26)



Investment in Real Estate












Contents



Subject                                                                                      Page

Investment in Real Estate
Preface ..................................................................................................         759
Statement of the Standard....................................................................        760
1. Scope of the Standard ............................................................................. 760
2. Definition..................................................................................................   760
3. Recognition ..............................................................................................   761
4. Measurement............................................................................................    762
5. Transfer.....................................................................................................   766
6. Derecognition ..........................................................................................   768
7. Presentation Requirements                                                                      768
8. Disclosure Requirements                                                                         769
9. Effective Date ...........................................................................................   772
10. Transitional Provision                                                                              772
Adoption of the Standard.....................................................................        774
Appendix (a):  Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard .............      775
Appendix (b):  Reasons for the Standard ...............................................        777
Appendix (c):  Basis for Conclusions...........................................................  778
Appendix (d): Application Guidance.......................................................   782
















757












Preface


This standard aims at setting out principles for the recognition, mea- surement, presentation and disclosure of investment in real estate that is acquired for the purpose of earning periodical income or held for future capital appreciation or both.











































759





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

1/1   This standard  shall apply in the recognition, measurement  and disclosure of the entity’s direct investment in real estate that is acquired for the purpose of earning periodical income or held for future capital appreciation or both.
1/2   This standard does not deal with matters covered under Financial Accounting Standard No. (8): Ijarah and Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek, including:
a) Measurement of investment in real estate leased on the basis of
Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek.
However, subsequent measurement of investment in real estate held to earn periodical consideration, which is defined in Financial Accounting Standard  No. (8) as an operating Ijarah, shall be measured using one of the two methods mentioned in this standard. The institution shall, in future financial periods, consistently apply the method chosen;
b) Recognition of lease income from investment in real estate; and c) Disclosures about Ijarah and Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek assets.
1/3   This Standard does not apply to investment in real estate related to agricultural activities and rights and resources related to mining and exploration activities such as oil, natural gas etc.
1/4   Should the requirements of this standard be in conflict with the entity’s charter or the laws and regulations of the country in which it operates, a disclosure should be made of the conflict.
2. Definition
The following terms are used in this standard with the meanings spec- ified:



760





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

2/1   Carrying amount: An amount at which the investment is recognised in the statement of financial position.
2/2   Cost: An amount  of cash equivalent amount  paid or fair value of other consideration given to acquire an asset at the time of its acquisition or construction.
2/3   Fair value: An amount for which an asset could be exchanged be- tween knowledgeable, willing parties in an arm’s length transaction.
2/4   Investment in real estate: A property  held to earn  periodical income or for capital appreciation or both, rather than for:
a) Use in the production  or supply of goods or services or for administrative purposes (owner occupied real estate); or
b) Sale in the ordinary course of business (inventory).

3. Recognition

3/1   For the purpose of this standard, an investment in real estate shall be recognised as an asset when - and only when:
a) It is probable that the future economic benefits that are associated with the investment in real estate will flow to the entity; and
b)The cost of the investment  in real estate can be measured reliably.
3/2  An entity evaluates under this recognition principle all its investment in real estate costs at the time they are incurred. These costs include costs incurred  initially to acquire an investment in real estate and costs incurred subsequently to add to, replace part of, or service a property.
3/3   Under the recognition principle in para 3/1, an entity does not recognise, in the carrying amount of an investment in real estate, the costs of day-to-day servicing of such a real estate. Rather, these costs are recognised in income statement as incurred. Costs of day- to-day servicing are primarily the cost of labour and consumables, and may include the cost of minor parts. The purpose of these expenditures is often described as for the ‘repairs and maintenance’ of the real estate.



761





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

4. Measurement

Initial measurement:

4/1   Investment  in real estate shall be measured initially at its cost including directly attributable expenditure.
4/2   The cost of a purchased property comprises its purchase price and any directly attributable expenditure. Directly attributable expenditure includes, for example, professional fees for legal services, property transfer taxes and other transaction costs.
4/3   The cost of a constructed or under construction property include any expenditure that is directly attributable to bringing the asset to the location and condition necessary for it to operate in the manner intended by the management.
4/4   For the purpose of initial recognition the cost of an investment in real estate does not include:
a) Start-up costs (unless they are necessary to bring the real estate to the condition necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management),
b) Operating  losses incurred  before the  property  achieves the planned level of occupancy, or
c) Abnormal amounts of wasted material, labour orother resources incurred in constructing or developing the property.
Subsequent measurement:

4/5   For the purpose of subsequent measurement, an entity shall determine whether the investment in real estate is being held-for-use or held- for-sale.
For held-for-use investments, an entity shall choose as its accounting policy either the fair value model in paragraphs 4/7–4/15 or the cost model in paragraphs 4/16-4/17 and shall apply that policy consistently to all of its investment in real estate.
Forheld-for-sale investments, anentity shall apply the requirements of paragraphs 4/18-4/20.



762





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

4/6   A voluntary change in accounting policy for investment in real estate held-for-use  shall be made only if the change results in the  financial statements  providing  reliable and  more  relevant information. It is highly unlikely that a change from the fair value model to the cost model will result in a more relevant presentation.
Fair value model:

4/7   An entity that chooses the fair value model shall measure all of its investment in real estate at fair value, except in cases described in paragraphs 4/13-4/15.
4/8   Any unrealised gains arising from a change in the fair value of investment in real estate shall be recognised directly in equity under “property fair value reserve” for the period in which it arises taking into consideration the split between the portion related to owners’ equity and equity of investment accountholders.
4/9   Any unrealised  losses resulting  from  re-measurement at fair value of investment  in real estate carried at fair value shall be adjusted in equity against the property fair value reserve, taking into consideration the split between the portion related to owners’ equity and equity of investment accountholders, to the extent of the available credit balance of this reserve. In case such losses exceed the available balance, the unrealised losses shall be recognised in the income statement. In case there are unrealised losses relating to investment  in real estate that  have been recognised  in the income statement in a previous financial period, the unrealised gains relating to the current financial period shall be recognised to the extent of crediting back such previous losses in the income statement.
4/10 The  realised  profits  or  losses resulting  from  the  sale of any investment in real estate shall be measured as the difference between the book value (or carrying amount)  and the net cash or cash equivalent proceeds from the sale for each investment separately. The resulting profit or loss together with the available balance on the property fair value reserve account shall be recognised in the



763





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

income statement  for the current  financial period, taking into consideration  the split between the portion  related to owners’ equity and the portion related to investment accountholders.
4/11 Investment in real estate under construction shall be measured at cost until the construction is completed.
4/12 Once the construction is completed and the property is ready for its intended use, it shall measured at its fair value in accordance with paragraphs 4/7-4/10.
Inability to determine fair value reliably:

4/13 There is a rebuttable presumptionthatanentity canreliably determine the fair value of an investment in real estate on a continuing basis. However, if in exceptional cases, there is clear evidence when an entity first acquires a real estate (or when an existing real estate first becomes investment  in real estate after a change in use) that the fair value of the investment in real estate is not reliably determinable  on a continuing  basis (other  than  an investment in real estate under construction),  the entity shall measure that investment in real estate using the cost model. This arises when, and only when, comparable market transactions are infrequent and alternative reliable estimates of fair value (for example, based on discounted cash flow projections) is not available.
4/14 In the exceptional cases when an entity is compelled, for the reason given in paragraph 4/13, to measure an investment in real estate using the cost model, it measures all its other investment in real estate at fair value (other than an investment in real estate under construction). In these cases, although an entity may use the cost model for one investment in real estate, the entity shall continue to account for each of the remaining properties using the fair value model.
4/15 If an entity has previously measured an investment in real estate at fair value, it shall continue to measure the real estate at fair value until disposal (or until the real estate becomes owner-occupied real estate or the entity begins to develop the real estate for subsequent



764





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

sale in the ordinary course of business) even if comparable market transactions become less frequent or market prices become less readily available.
Cost model:

4/16 An entity that  chooses the cost model shall measure all of its investment in real estate at cost less depreciation and any impairment provisions. Depreciation is the systematic allocation of the cost of an asset over its useful life.
4/17 Major expenditure incurred by the entity related to additions to and improvements in real estate subsequent to its acquisition shall be added to the carrying amount of investment in real estate in the statement of financial position, provided that the entity expects that such expenditure will increase the future economic benefits to the entity from  the real estate. However, if such economic benefits are not expected to take place, the entity shall recognise this expenditure in the income statement in the financial period in which it is incurred, taking into consideration the split between the portion related to owners’ equity and the portion related to investment accountholders.
Investment in real estate held-for-sale:

4/18 If the entity has made a decision to sell an investment in real estate and expects the sale to occur within twelve months from the end of its reporting period, the investment shall be reclassified in the statement of financial position as ‘investment in real estate held-for-sale’.
4/19 Depreciation on investment in real estate carried at cost must be discontinued from the date of such reclassification and the investment shall be carried at lower of its carrying value and expected fair value less costs to sell (net realisable value). Any adjustment shall be recognised in the income statement. Investment in real estate carried at fair value shall continue to be measured at fair value.
4/20 However, if the investment in real estate is not sold within twelve months (except for delays in conclusion of a sale transaction in



765





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

its normal course is beyond the control of entity) or the plan to sell has been discontinued, the asset is reclassified to its previous classification. For investment in real estate carried at cost, the asset is remeasured to the lower of its recoverable amount  and the carrying amount that would have been recognised if the asset would not  have been classified as held-for-sale. The resulting adjustment is recognised in the income statement of the period when reclassification is made.
5. Transfer

5/1   An entity can transfer from investment in real estate to any other classification when, there is a change in use, evidenced by:
a) Commencement of own use, for a transfer from investment in real estate to owner-occupied real estate;
b) Commencement of development with a view to sale, for a transfer from investment in real estate to inventory.
5/2   An entity can transfer to investment in real estate from any other classification when, there is a change in use, evidenced by:
a) End of owner-occupation, for a transfer from owner-occupied real estate to investment in real estate; or
b) Commencement of an operating Ijarah to another  party, for a transfer from inventory to investment in real estate.
5/3   Para 5/1 requires an entity to transfer a property from investment in real estate to inventories when, and only when, there is a change in use, evidenced by commencement of development with a view to sale. When an entity decides to dispose of an investment in real estate without development, it continues to treat the real estate as an investment in real estate until it is derecognised (eliminated from the statement of financial position) and does not treat it as inventory. Similarly, if an entity begins to redevelop an existing investment in real estate for continued future use as investment in real estate, the real estate remains an investment in real estate and is not reclassified as owner-occupied real estate during the redevelopment.



766





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

5/4   When an entity uses the cost model, transfers between investments in real estate, owner-occupied real estate and inventory do not change the carrying amount  of the real estate transferred  and they do not change the cost of that real estate for measurement or disclosure purposes.
5/5   For a transfer from investment in real estate carried at fair value to owner-occupied real estate or inventory, the real estate’s deemed cost for subsequent accounting shall be its fair value at the date of transfer. The previously recognised property fair value reserve in equity shall be utilised as follows:
a) In case of transfer to owner occupied real estate, the amount equivalent to the depreciation  on the previously recognised fair value component of the property shall be transferred to the income statement over the remaining life of the asset; and
b) In case of property transferred to inventory, the property fair value reserve shall be transferred to income statement only on disposal of the property.
5/6   If an owner-occupied real estate becomes an investment in real estate that will be carried at fair value, an entity shall apply cost less depreciation and any impairment provision, up to the date of change in use. The entity treats any difference at that date between the carrying amount of real estate and its fair value as below:
a) Any resulting decrease in the carrying amount of real estate is recognised in income statement. However, in case of owner- occupied real estate that was previously revalued, to the extent that an amount is included in revaluation surplus for that real estate, the decrease is recognised in equity and reduces the revaluation surplus within equity.
b) Any resulting increase in the carrying amount is treated as follows: i) To the extent that the increase reverses a previous impairment loss for that real estate, the increase is recognised in income statement. The amount recognised in income statement does
not exceed the amount needed to restore the carrying amount



767





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

to the carrying amount that would have been determined (net of depreciation) had no impairment loss been recognised.
ii) Any remaining part of the increase is recognised in equity and  increases the revaluation surplus on owner occupied real estate within  equity. On  subsequent  disposal of the investment in real estate, the revaluation surplus included in equity may be transferred directly to retained earnings.

5/7   For a transfer from inventory to investment in real estate that will be carried at fair value, any difference between the fair value of the real estate at that date and its previous carrying amount shall be recognised in equity under “property fair value reserve”.
6. Derecognition
6/1   An investment in real estate shall be derecognised (eliminated from the statement of financial position) on disposal or when the investment in real estate is permanently withdrawn from use and no future economic benefits are expected from its disposal.
6/2   Gains or losses arising from the retirement or disposal of investment in real estate shall be determined as the difference between the net disposal proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset, and shall be recognised in income statement in the period of the retirement or disposal, taking into consideration the split between the portion related to owner’s equity and the portion  related to investment accountholders. In case of investment in real estate carried at fair value, for the purpose of computation of the recognised gain or loss in the income statement, the carrying amount shall be considered after adjusting the available balance on the property fair value reserve account attributable to the asset disposed.
7. Presentation Requirements
7/1   At the end of the financial period, investment in real estate shall be presented separately as a line item on the assets side of the statement of financial position.
7/2   Gains/losses from investment  in real estate shall be presented separately in the income statement or in the notes under “Gains/



768





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

losses from investments in real estate” taking into consideration the split between the portion  related to owner’s equity and the portion related to investment accountholders.
7/3   Investment in real estate held-for-sale within twelve months shall be presented separately on the face of the statement of financial position. Gain/losses from investment in real estate held-for-sale shall be presented separately on the face of the income statement.
8. Disclosure Requirements

8/1 An entity shall disclose:
a) Whether it applies the fair value model or the cost model.
b) When   classification  as  investment   in  real  estate  involves significant judgement,  and  the criteria it uses to  distinguish investment in real estate from owner-occupied real estate and from inventory.
c) The methods and significant assumptions applied in determining the fair value of investment in real estate, including a statement whether the determination of fair value was supported by market evidence or was more heavily based on other factors (which the entity shall disclose) because of the nature of the real estate and the lack of comparable market data.
d) The extent to which the fair value of investment in real estate (as measured or disclosed in the financial statements) is based on a valuation by an independent valuer who holds a recognised and relevant professional qualification and has recent experience in the location and category of the investment in real estate being valued. If there has been no such valuation, that fact shall be disclosed.
e) Carrying  value of asset under  construction  and  movements during the year.
f) The amounts recognised in income statement for:
i) Rental income from investment in real estate;
ii) Direct operating expenses (including repairs and maintenance) arising from investment in real estate that generated rental income during the period; and



769





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

iii) Direct operating expenses (including repairs and maintenance) arising from investment in real estate that did not generate rental income during the period.
g) The existence and amounts of restrictions on the realisability of investment in real estate or the remittance of income and proceeds of disposal.
h) The existence of any charge, pledge or restriction on the title of the investment in real estate.
i)  Contractual  obligations/commitments  to purchase, construct or develop investment in real estate or for repairs, maintenance or enhancements.
Fair value model:
8/2   In addition to the disclosures required above, an entity that applies the fair value model shall disclose a reconciliation between the carrying amounts of investment in real estate at the beginning and at the end of the period, showing the following:
a) Additions; disclosing separately those additions resulting from acquisitions and those resulting from subsequent expenditure recognised in the carrying amount of an asset;
b) Net gains or losses from fair value adjustments;
c) In case of assets of a foreign operation, the net foreign exchange differences arising on the translation, if any;
d) Transfers to and from inventory and owner-occupied real estate;
and
e) Other changes.
8/3   When a valuation obtained for investment in real estate is adjusted significantly for the purpose of the financial statements, the entity shall disclose a reconciliation between the valuation obtained and the significant adjustments included in the financial statements.
8/4   In the exceptional cases referred to in paragraph 4/13, when an entity following the fair value model measures certain investment in real estate using the cost model, the reconciliation required by paragraph
8/2 shall disclose amounts relating to that investment in real estate separately from amounts relating to other investment in real estate.



770





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

In addition, an entity shall disclose:
a) A description of the investment in real estate;
b) An explanation of why fair value cannot be determined reliably;
c) If possible, the range of estimates within which fair value is highly likely to lie; and
d) On disposal of investment in real estate not carried at fair value:
i) The fact that the entity has disposed of investment in real estate not carried at fair value;
ii) The carrying amount of that investment in real estate at the time of sale; and
iii) The amount of gain or loss recognised.

Cost model:
8/5   In addition to the disclosures required by para 8/1, an entity that applies the cost model shall disclose:
a) The depreciation methods used;
b) The useful lives or the depreciation rates used;
c) The gross carrying amount and the accumulated depreciation at the beginning and at the end of the period;
d) A reconciliation of the carrying amount of investment in real estate at the beginning and at the end of the period, showing the following:
i) Additions; disclosing separately those additions resulting from acquisitions and those resulting from subsequent expenditure recognised as an asset;
ii) Depreciation;
iii) The amount of impairment losses recognised, and the amount of impairment losses reversed, during the period;
iv) In  case of assets of a foreign operation,  the  net  foreign exchange differences arising on the translation, if any;
v) Transfers to and from inventory and owner-occupied real estate;
and

vi) Other changes.
e) Change in depreciation methods and useful lives or the de- preciation rates used (in accordance with the requirements of



771





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

Financial Accounting Standard No. (1): General Presentation and Disclosure in the Financial Statements of Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions); and
f) The fair value of investment in real estate carried at cost and the basis of determination of fair values (i.e., whether fair value is based on a valuation by an independent valuer etc.). In the exceptional cases described in para 4/13, when an entity cannot determine the fair value of the investment in real estate reliably, it shall disclose:
i) A description of the investment in real estate;

ii) An explanation  of why fair value cannot  be determined reliably; and
iii) If possible, the range of estimates within which fair value is highly likely to lie.

9. Effective Date

9/1   This standard shall be effective for financial periods beginning 1
Muharram 1434 A.H. or 1 January 2013 A.D. Earlier application is permitted. If the standard is applied in an earlier reporting period, the financial statements shall disclose that the standard has been early adopted.
10. Transitional Provisions

10/1 This standard shall be applied retroactively in accordance with the requirements stated in Financial Accounting Standard No. (1): General Presentation and Disclosure in the Financial Statements of Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions.
10/2 The entity shall disclose the effect of implementing this standard in the financial statements for the financial period in which this standard is applied for the first time.
10/3 The effect of the change in accounting policy on investment in real estate and the effect on income/loss from investments in real estate for the current period and for each prior period presented should be disclosed.



772





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

10/4 The effect of the change in accounting policy on investment accounts and the effect on their share of income/loss from investments for the current period and for each prior period presented, should be dis-
closed.



















































773





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate





Adoption of the Standard


The Standard of Investments in Real Estate was adopted by the Accounting and Auditing Standards Board in its meeting No. (40) on 21 June 2012 A.D.

Members of the Board
1. Mr. Muhammad Said Abdulwahab                   Chairman
2. Mr. Hamad Abdulla Eqab                                 Deputy Chairman
3. Sheikh Dr. Abdul Sattar Abu-Ghuddah
4. Sheikh Essam Mohammed Ishaq
5. Mr. Fawad Laique
6. Mr. Jamil A Darras
7. Dr. Nordin Mohd Zain / Mr. Aly El Azhary
8. Mr. Firas S Hamdan
9. Mr. Simon Gray
10. Dr. Hussein Said Saifan
11. Mr. M Faiz Azmi / Mr. Madhukar Shenoy
12. Mr. Prakash Pathmanathan
13. Mr. Oliver Agha
14. Mr. Jalil Al-Aali
15. Dr. Khaled Al Fakih                              Member/ Secretary General/ Rapporteur


















774





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate





Appendix (A)
Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (36) held in Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain on 27 Dhul- Qa’dah 1430 A.H., corresponding to 16 October 2009 A.D., the Accounting and Auditing  Standard  Board decided to develop a new Standard  on Investment in Sukuk, Shares, and Similar Instruments.

Subsequently, a consultant was commissioned to prepare a preliminary study and exposure draft of the Standard on Investment in Sukuk, Shares, and Similar Instruments. Preparation of the preliminary study and exposure draft was overseen by the Accounting and Auditing Standards Board.

The preliminary study and exposure draft were discussed by the Accounting and Auditing Standards Board through a series of meetings and telephone conference calls.

The preliminary study and exposure draft were deliberated by Accounting and Auditing Standard Board in its meeting No. (37) held on 10 Sha’ban
1431 A.H., corresponding to 22 July 2010 A.D., and (38) held on 10 Sha’ban
1431 A.H., corresponding to 2 December 2011 A.D. Subsequent exposure draft was also deliberated by Accounting and Auditing Standard Board in its meeting No. (39) held on 21 Rajab 1432 A.H., corresponding to 23 June
2011 A.D.

Listening session of the exposure  draft was convened  in Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain on 29 Rabi’ II, 1433 A.H., corresponding to 22 March
2012 A.D., to gather comments from the Islamic finance industry as well as accounting and auditing professions.
The exposure draft was revised in light of the comments made in Account- ing and Auditing Standards Board meeting No. (39) and the listening session.



775





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

The Accounting and Auditing Standards Board adopted the Standard on Investments in Associates at its meeting No. (40) held on 1 Sha’ban 1433
A.H., corresponding to 21 June 2012 A.D.





















































776





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate





Appendix (B)
Reasons for the Standard


The previous Financial Accounting Standard No. (17) on Investments first issued in 2002 A.D. previously dealt with all forms of investments including  investment  in  real  estate  and  laid  the  initial  foundation for accounting  and  reporting  of investments  in real estate. Given the significant diversity in  the  accounting  requirements  of investment  in financial instruments  and  real estate, there was a need for separation of the accounting standards  for these investments. Also the real estate investments  now  form  a  substantial  part  of the  financial  statements and  activities of Islamic Financial Institutions.  It  was concluded  that accounting  for investment  in real estate shall be addressed through  a separate and more detailed accounting standard. Further, over the years, complex accounting issues have evolved in line with the expansion of the real estate sector and the current standards were seen to be very basic to address the needs and requirements of the various users and preparers of financial statements. There was a need for providing additional guidance regarding issues surrounding the classification of investment in real estate, treatment  for under construction  assets and jointly financed assets etc., and enhance the disclosure requirements for exposure to investments in real estate.
















777





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate





Appendix (C)
Basis for Conclusions


Scope

The scope of the standard intends to cover direct investment in real estate rather than investment in shares and other financial instruments providing indirect exposure to investment in real estate. Accounting for such investments is covered under other standards within AAOIFI. The accounting guidance in this standard applies to each level of the financial statements  separately;  i.e., both  consolidated  and  individual  financial statements of an entity. For example, if a subsidiary holds investment in real estate, on consolidation on a line-by-line basis, the guidance of this standard shall apply to investments in real estate in preparation of the consolidated financial statements. However, the investment in the subsidiary in separate financial statements shall be accounted for in accordance with FAS No. (23) on Consolidation.

Definition

The definition of investment in real estate has been largely retained from the previous FAS No. (17). The new standard clarifies the definition further and has added extensive application guidance to assist in determination of classification of investment in real estate under this standard and reduce inconsistency in practice. Determination  of which assets are scoped out within  this  standard  is based on  management  intention  and  involves judgement  and  hence  additional  disclosure  requirements  have  been added to assist users in obtaining more information  and understanding management’s basis of classification of investment in real estate.
In line with the previous FAS No. (17), measurement of Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek assets have been scoped out from this standard. However, this has been made explicit in the drafting of the revised standard. As assets



778





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

under Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek contracts are eventually transferred to the lessee, it was considered in appropriate to provide fair value option for such assets to the lessor.

Jointly Financed Investment

The previous standard required separate classification requirements for the portion of investment jointly financed by the investment accountholders. The Accounting and Auditing Standards Board noted that this conceptually created diversity in accounting for investment in real estate. The Board also noted that the accounting for the funding provided by the investment accountholders is governed by the previous Financial Accounting Standard No. (6): Equity of investment accountholders and their equivalent and this standard should only focus on providing a single basis of recognition and measurement for each investment irrespective of its mix of funding. Hence, it was concluded that this standard shall not provide different classification or measurement criteria for investments based on its source of funding. However, the Board noted that, consistent with the requirements of Financial Accounting Standard No. (1): General Presentation and Disclosure in the Financial Statements of Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions, each entity should provide the disclosures of the sources of funding of its assets. Further, it was noted that distribution of profits to investment accountholders was governed by contractual terms and based on the distribution principles approved by the Shari’a supervisory board of each entity and hence divergent account policies purely based on sources of funding of the asset was not considered appropriate.

Subsequent Measurement
The subsequent measurement rules are in line with the previous FAS No. (17); i.e., at cost and at fair value. The Board discussed whether the two measurement choices should be retained. As this standard is focussed on investments, the Board fully supported the fair value model as it provides a relevant measure of the value of the entity’s assets and would support a business model that holds assets for capital appreciation. However, the Board also noted that the cost model is required where the ability to derive a reliable and consistent measure of fair value was in doubt and where



779





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

there was a need for property markets to develop and mature. Also, entities focussed on periodic return on assets may have preferences for the cost model to reflect operational efficiencies.

Where the investments  in real estate are measured at fair value, the previous FAS No. (17) also required that the fair value gains be reported in the statement of financial position in a separate fair value reserve. This requirement  addressed Shari’a concerns on distribution  of profits on the basis of unrealised fair value gains arising from investment in real estate. Accordingly, this requirement  has been retained in the revised standard. The requirements are similar to the accounting for financial investments in  ‘available-for-sale’  investments  in  the  previous  FAS No.  (17)  and
‘equity investments  at fair value through  equity’ under  FAS No. (25). Although the standard retains the fair value option for entities to provide alternative reliable and relevant measurement of investment in real estate (financial position perspective), the standard implicitly requires that any gains should be considered as part of profit or loss only on realisation.

Further,  it was clarified that  the requirements  to assess impairment for investment in real estate carried at cost and recognition of fair value decline in the income statement for investment in real estate carried at fair value should be performed on an asset-by-asset basis and a portfolio based assessment was not appropriate.

Investment in Real Estate Under Construction
This standard does not allow under construction assets to be measured at fair value until the construction is completed. The Board discussed this matter at length and noted that largely the property markets remain less developed for such assets and the experience and maturity of the valuation profession in most markets to develop a reliable measure of fair value of under construction assets that meet the definition of the framework was yet to be tested satisfactorily. Hence, to ensure relevance, reliability and understandability of measurement for financial reporting purposes, it was decided that under construction  assets would be measured at cost until completion of construction.



780





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

Investment in Real Estate Held-for-Sale

The Board also noted that investment in real estate (cost model) held for sale within twelve months should be measured at lower of its carrying value and fair value less cost to sell to reflect the intention of the management to realise the value of the asset through sale rather than its continuing use (i.e., discontinuation  of depreciation). Investment in real estate carried at fair value would only need separate presentation in the statement of financial position to reflect management intent; however, as the measurement  is using a fair value basis there would be no requirement to follow separate measurement guidance for such assets.

Disclosures

Enhanced disclosure requirements have been added to the standard to improve the extent of information available to the users of the financial statements in relation to an entity’s exposure to investments in real estate. In case of use of the fair value model, in addition  to other  enhanced disclosures, requirements have been added to disclose adjustments made to  valuations obtained  for financial statement  purposes.  It  was noted that some valuation reports reflect the fair value of the wider/composite property and adjustments are required to be made to valuations to reflect values to be recognised in the financial statements.  Examples include allocation between own-use and investment in real estate of a combined asset, adjustments made to avoid double-counting (e.g., when valuation includes value attributable to furniture, equipment etc., which are or may be required to be recognised separately, adjustment for liabilities etc.).

Transition Provisions
As the standard  retains the primary classification categories and the required  information  is expected to  be  available under  the  previous requirements of FAS No. (17), it was decided that the amendments should be applied retroactively in accordance with the principles of Financial Accounting Standard No. (1): General Presentation and Disclosure in the Financial Statements of Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions.






781





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate





Appendix (D)
Application Guidance*


Definition of Investment in Real Estate

Investment  in real estate comprise property  (land or a building -or part of a building- or both) held to earn periodical income or for capital appreciation  or both. Therefore, an investment  in real estate generates cash flows largely independently of the other assets held by an entity. This distinguishes investment in real estate from owner-occupied real estate. The production  or supply of goods or services (or the use of real estate for administrative purposes) generates cash flows that are attributable not only to the real estate, but also to other assets used in the production  or supply process.

The following are examples of investment in real estate that are covered within the scope of this standard:
a) Land held for long-term capital appreciation rather than for short- term sale in the ordinary course of business.
b) Land held for a currently undetermined future use, (If an entity has not determined that it will use the land as owner-occupied real estate or for short-term sale in the ordinary course of business, the land is regarded as held for capital appreciation).
c) A building owned by the entity and leased out under one or more operating Ijarah contracts.
d) A building that is vacant but is held to be leased out under one or more operating Ijarah contracts.
e) Property that is being constructed or developed for future use as
investment in real estate.

(*) The application guidance is an intergral part of this standard.



782





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

The following are examples of items that are not investment in real estate and are therefore outside the scope of this standard:
a) Real estate intended for sale in the ordinary course of business or in the process of construction or development for such sale, for example, real estate acquired exclusively with a view to subsequent disposal in the near future or for development and resale (inventories).
b) Owner-occupied real estate, including (among other  things) real estate held for future use as owner-occupied real estate, real estate held for future development and subsequent use as owner-occupied real estate, real estate occupied by employees and owner-occupied real estate awaiting disposal.
c) Real estate being constructed or developed on behalf of third parties
(construction contracts).
d) Investment  in real estate leased on the basis of Ijarah Muntahia
Bittamleek.
Some real estate comprise a portion that is held to earn rentals or for capital appreciation and another portion that is owner occupied. If these portions  could be sold separately, an entity accounts for the portions separately. If the portions  could not be sold separately, the property is classified as investment in real estate only if an insignificant portion  is owner occupied.

In some cases, an entity provides ancillary services to the occupants of a property  it holds. Such property  is accounted  for as investment  in real estate if the services are insignificant to the arrangement as a whole. An example is when the owner of an office building provides security and maintenance services to the lessees who occupy the building.

In other  cases, if the services provided are significant the property shall be treated as owner-occupied real estate, rather than investment in real estate. For example, if an entity owns and manages a hotel, services provided to guests are significant to the arrangement as a whole and hence the hotel property would not be treated as investment in real estate.
It  may be difficult to  determine  whether  ancillary services are  so significant that a real estate does not qualify as investment in real estate. For



783





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

example, the owner of a hotel sometimes transfers some responsibilities to third parties under a management contract. The terms of such contracts vary widely. At one end of the spectrum, the owner’s position may, in substance, be that of a passive investor. At the other end of the spectrum, the owner may simply have outsourced day-to-day functions while retaining significant exposure to variation in the cash flows generated by the operations of the hotel.

Judgment is needed to determine  whether a real estate qualifies as investment in real estate. An entity develops criteria so that it can exercise that judgment consistently in accordance with the definition of investment in real estate.

Consolidated Financial Statements

In some cases, an entity owns real estate that is leased to, and occupied by, its parent or another  subsidiary. The real estate does not qualify as investment in real estate in the consolidated financial statements, because the  real estate is owner-occupied  from  the  perspective of the  group. However, from the perspective of the entity that owns it, the real estate is investment in real estate if it meets the definition in paragraph  (8). Therefore, the lessor treats the real estate as investment in real estate in its individual financial statements.

Explanation of the Definition of Fair Value

The fair value of investment in real estate is the price at which the real estate could be exchanged between knowledgeable, willing parties in an arm’s length transaction. Fair value specifically excludes an estimated price inflated or deflated by special terms or circumstances such as a typical financing sale and leaseback arrangement, special considerations or concessions granted by anyone associated with the sale.
The fair value of investment in real estate shall reflect market conditions at the end of the reporting period. Fair value is time-specific as of a given date. Because market conditions may change, the amount reported as fair value may be incorrect or inappropriate if estimated as of another time. The definition of fair value also assumes simultaneous exchange and completion



784





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

of the contract for sale without any variation in price that might be made in an arm’s length transaction between knowledgeable, willing parties if exchange and completion are not simultaneous.

The fair value of investment in real estate held for earning periodic income reflects, among other things, rental income from current leases and reasonable and supportable assumptions that represent what knowledgeable, willing parties would assume about rental income from future leases in the light of current conditions. It also reflects, on a similar basis, any cash outflows (including rental payments and  other  outflows) that  could be expected in respect of the real estate. Some of those outflows are reflected in the liability whereas others relate to outflows that are not recognised in the financial statements until a later date (e.g., periodic payments such as contingent rents).

The definition of fair value refers to ‘knowledgeable, willing parties’. In this context, ‘knowledgeable’ means that both the willing buyer and the willing seller are reasonably informed about the nature and characteristics of the investment in real estate, its actual and potential uses, and market conditions at the end of the reporting period. A willing buyer is motivated, but not compelled, to buy. This buyer is neither over-eager nor determined to buy at any price. The assumed buyer would not pay a higher price than a market  comprising  knowledgeable, willing buyers and  sellers would require.

A willing seller is neither an over-eager nor a forced seller, prepared to sell at any price, nor one prepared to hold out for a price not considered reasonable in current market conditions. The willing seller is motivated to sell the investment in real estate at market terms forthe best price obtainable. The factual circumstances of the actual investment in real estate owner are not a part of this consideration because the willing seller is a hypothetical owner (e.g., a willing seller would not take into account the particular tax circumstances of the actual investment in real estate owner).
The definition of fair value refers to an arm’s length transaction. An arm’s length transaction is one between parties that do not have a particular or



785





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

special relationship that makes prices of transactions uncharacteristic of market conditions. The transaction is presumed to be between unrelated parties, each acting independently.

The best evidence of fair value is given by current prices in an active market  for similar real estate in the same location and condition  and subject to similar lease and other contracts. An entity takes care to identify any differences in the nature, location or condition of the property, or in the contractual  terms of the leases and other  contracts  relating to the property.

In the absence of current prices in an active market, an entity considers information from a variety of sources, including:
a) Current prices in an active market for properties of different nature, condition or location (or subject to different lease or other contracts), adjusted to reflect those differences;
b) Recent prices of similar properties  on less active markets,  with adjustments  to reflect any changes in economic conditions  since the date of the transactions that occurred at those prices; and
c) Discounted  cash flow projections  based on reliable estimates  of future cash flows, supported by the terms of any existing lease and other contracts and (when possible) by external evidence such as current  market  rents for similar properties  in the same location and condition, and using discount rates that reflect current market assessments of the uncertainty  in the amount  and timing of the cash flows.
In some cases, the various sources listed in the previous paragraph may suggest different conclusions about the fair value of an investment in real estate. An entity considers the reasons for those differences in order to arrive at the most reliable estimate of fair value within a range of reasonable fair value estimates.
In determining the carrying amount of investment in real estate under the fair value model, an entity does not double-count assets or liabilities that are recognised as separate assets or liabilities. For example:



786





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

a) Equipment such as lifts or air-conditioning is often an integral part of a building and is generally included in the fair value of the investment in real estate, rather than recognised separately as fixed asset.
b) If an office is leased on a furnished basis, the fair value of the office generally includes the fair value of the furniture, because the rental income relates to the furnished office. When furniture is included in the fair value of investment in real estate, an entity does not recognise that furniture as a separate asset.
c) The fair value of investment in real estate excludes prepaid or accrued operating lease income, because the entity recognises it as a separate liability or asset.
d) The fair value of investment in real estate held under a lease reflects expected cash flows (including contingent rent that is expected to become payable).
Accordingly, if a valuation obtained for a real estate is net of all payments expected to be made, it will be necessary to add back any recognised lease liability to arrive at the carrying amount of the investment in real estate using the fair value model.

The fair value of investment in real estate does not reflect future capital expenditure that will improve or enhance the real estate and does not reflect the related future benefits from this future expenditure.

An entity is encouraged, but not required, to determine the fair value of investment in real estate on the basis of a valuation by an independent valuer who holds a recognised and relevant professional qualification and has recent experience in the location and category of the investment in real estate being valued.

Finance Cost on Assets Under Construction
Directly attributable expenditure for assets under construction shall also include finance costs incurred on a time proportion basis during the construction period. Only financing costs of contracts that are specific to the construction of the underlying asset should be considered to qualify for capitalization. Other financing costs shall be charged to the income statement.



787





Financial Accounting Standard No. (26): Investment in Real Estate

Impairment
The Board was of the view that the international guidance available on determination and measurement of impairment for investment in real es- tate was adequate, and separate guidance was not required under the revised standard.
















































788
