
























Financial Accounting Standard No. (10)



Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a












Contents



Subject                                                                        Para.    Page

Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a
Preface .................................................................................                          367
Statement of the Standard...................................................                         368
1. Scope of the Standard .......................................................... (12)           368
2. Accounting Treatment by the Islamic Bank As Al-Sani’
(A Seller)................................................................................      (2-28)         368
3. Accounting Treatment of Istisna’a by the Islamic Bank As
Al-Mustasni’ (A Buyer) .........................................................   (29-36)       373
4. Disclosure Requirements..................................................... (37-46)       375
5. Effective Date ........................................................................ (47)           376
Adoption of the Standard....................................................                         377
Appendix (a):   Examples of the Application of Some Aspects
of the Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a Standard...                           378
Appendix (b):  Brief History of the Preparation of the
Standard..............................................................                   386
Appendix (c):  Juristic Rules for Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a                         388
Appendix (d): Reasons for the Standard..................................                      397
Appendix (e):  Basis for Conclusions........................................                     399
Appendix (f):  Definitions..........................................................                    402

















365












Preface


This standard aims at setting out accounting rules for recognizing, mea- suring and disclosing the transactions of Istisna’a and parallel Istisna’a that are carried out by Islamic banks and financial institutions.(1)  Attached with the standard are details of the juristic bases for the accounting treatments.
Istisna’a contract is usually accompanied with a separate parallel contract, whereby an Islamic bank acts in the first contract as a seller (Al-Sani’) of goods (Al-Masnoo’, the subject-matter of the contract) to an ultimate buyer (Al-Mustasni’) while in the parallel Istisna’a contract the Islamic bank acts as a buyer (Al-Mustasni’) of Al-Masnoo’ from another seller (Al-Sani’).






























(1) Referred to hereafter as Islamic bank or Islamic banks.



367





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard
This standard addresses the accounting rules of Istisna’a and parallel Istisna’a contracts in the financial statements of Islamic banks relating to measuring and recognizing the costs and revenues from Istisna’a and parallel Istisna’a, the gains and losses accruing therefrom,  and their presentation and disclosure in the financial statements of the Islamic bank.

Should the requirements of this standard contradict the Islamic bank’s charter or the laws and regulations of the country in which it operates and the Islamic bank had to comply with such requirements, a disclosure should be made to the point of conflict. (para. 1)

2. Accounting Treatment by the Islamic Bank As Al-Sani’ (A Seller)
2/1 Istisna’a costs
a) Istisna’a costs consist of: (I) Direct costs, in particular costs of producing  Al-Masnoo’; and (II) Indirect  costs relating to the contract as allocated on an objective basis. General and admin- istrative expenses, selling expenses, research and development costs shall not be included in an Istisna’a contract costs. (para. 2)
b) Istisna’a costs incurred during a financial period, as well as pre- contract costs as described in (c) below, shall be recognized in an Istisna’a work-in-progress account, and reported under assets in the statement of financial position of the Islamic bank. (In case of parallel Istisna’a, this account shall be called Istisna’a costs account as stated in 2/2 a). Amounts billed to Al-Mustasni’ will be debited to Istisna’a accounts receivable account and credited to an Istisna’a billings account. The balance of the latter account shall be offset against Istisna’a work-in-progress account in the appropriate side of the Islamic bank’s statement of financial position. (para. 3)



368





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

c) Pre-contract costs shall be recognized as deferred costs when they are incurred, and accounted for upon contracting by transferring them to the Istisna’a work-in-progress account. If no contract is signed and it is unlikely that it will be signed in the future, then the deferred costs in question shall be written-off to expense during the current financial period. (para. 4)
2/2 Contract costs in parallel Istisna’a
a) When a parallel Istisna’a exists, the costs of Istisna’a include the price fixed in the parallel Istisna’a contract (direct costs), together with indirect costs including any pre-contract costs as described in
2/1(c). When the subcontractor bills the Islamic bank for contract costs, these will be debited to Istisna’a costs account and credited to the subcontractor’s Al-Sani’ account under Istisna’a accounts payable. The Istisna’a costs account shall be reported under assets in the statement of financial position of the Islamic bank. (para. 5)
b) Progress billings made by the Islamic bank to the ultimate purchaser (Al-Mustasni’) during the period shall be accounted for by debiting an Istisna’a accounts receivable account. The same amount shall also be credited to Istisna’a billings account, the balance of which shall be offset against Istisna’a cost account in the Islamic bank’s financial statements. (para. 6)
2/3 Istisna’a revenue and profit at the end of a financial period

2/3/1 Istisna’a revenue and profit

Istisna’a revenue is the total price agreed upon between the Islamic bank as Al-Sani’ and the client as Al-Mustasni’, including the Islamic bank’s profit margin on the contract. Istisna’a revenue and the associated profit margin are recognized in the Islamic bank’s financial statements according to either the percentage of completion or the completed contract methods as set up below, taking into consideration what is stated in item 2/3/1/2. (para. 7)

2/3/1/1 Percentage of completion method
a) A part of the contract price commensurate with the work performed during each period in which the



369





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

contract is being executed shall be recognized as revenue for that period. (para. 8)
b) The portion of the Istisna’a profit margin recognized during the financial period (Istisna’a profit margin being the difference between the cash price of Al- Masnoo’ to the ultimate purchaser and the Islamic bank’s estimated total Istisna’a costs) shall be added to the Istisna’a  work-in-progress account. Thus, at any point in time, the balance of the Istisna’a work- in-progress account  will include the  amount  of profit recognized to date subject to deduction of any anticipated contract losses, as will be indicated in 2/4 (a) below. (para. 9)
2/3/1/2 Completed contract method

In unusual circumstances where both the percentage of completion and the expected cost to complete the contract cannot be estimated with reasonable accuracy at the end of the financial period, no contract revenue shall be recognized until the contract is fully completed. Thus, until that date, the accumulated contract costs will be carried forward on the Istisna’a work-in-progress account, without any profit element being recognized. (para. 10)

2/3/2 Deferred profits

The contract  price may be fully paid by Al-Mustasni’ by instalments during the contract based on progress in work. However, all or  part  of the  price may be paid  following completion of the contract. In the latter case, the difference between the total price that is paid during the contract and the agreed total price –defined as deferred profits– shall be offset against  Istisna’a accounts  receivable in  the  Islamic bank’s statement of financial position. This treatment  shall



370





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

apply whether the percentage of completion method or the completed  contract  method  is used  for recognizing  and measuring Istisna’a revenues and profit. (para. 11)

Deferred profits shall be recognized using one of the two following methods:
a) Proportionate allocation of deferred profits over the future financial period of credit whereby each financial period shall carry its portion of profits irrespective of whether or not cash is received. This is the preferred method. (para. 12) b)As and when each instalment  is received. This method shall be used based on a decision by the Shari’a supervisory board of the Islamic bank or if it is required by supervisory
authorities. (para. 13)

2/3/3 Early settlement

a) If Al-Mustasni’ makes a payment in advance of the due date for such a payment, the Islamic bank may waive part of its profit in recognition of this earlier payment. In that case, the amount of profit waived shall be deducted from both Istisna’a accounts receivable account and deferred profits account. (para. 14)
b)The same accounting treatment as in (a) above shall apply if the facts are the same except that the Islamic bank did not grant a partial reduction of the profit when the payment was made, but reimbursed Al-Mustasni’ with this amount after receiving the payments. (para. 15)
2/3/4 Parallel Istisna’a revenue and profit

a) Parallel Istisna’a revenue and profit for each financial pe- riod shall be measured and recognized according to the percentage of completion method, since in parallel Istisna’a both costs and revenues of Istisna’a are known to the Islamic bank with reasonable certainty. (para. 16)
b)The recognized portion of Istisna’a profits for a financial
period shall be added to Istisna’a costs account. Thus, at any



371





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

point in time the balance of the Istisna’a costs account shall be equal to the cumulative cost of the Istisna’a contract (the total amount in progress billings authorised by the Islamic bank) plus the total Istisna’a profits recognized up to that point. (para. 17)
c) If the contract price or part thereof is to be paid following the completion of the contract, the accounting treatments in 2/3/2 and 2/3/3 (a, b) shall apply. (para. 18)
2/4 Measurement of Istisna’a work-in-progress, Istisna’a costs and treat- ment of contract losses at the end of a financial period
a) In the event of applying the percentage of completion method for the recognition of Istisna’a revenue and profit, Istisna’a work- in-progress shall be measured and reported in the statement of financial position of the Islamic bank at a value not exceeding its cash equivalent value (i.e., the difference between the contract price and the expected additional cost to complete the contract). (para. 19)
b) Any expected loss resulting from the valuation of Istisna’a work- in-progress at the end of a financial period shall be recognized and reported in the Islamic bank’s income statement. (para. 20)
c) When a parallel Istisna’a exists, Istisna’a costs shall be treated as in (a) and (b) above. (para. 21)
d) The subcontractor may fail to honour his obligation in a parallel Istisna’a resulting in additional cost for the Islamic bank to fulfil its obligation towards Al-Mustasni’ (the client). Any such additional costs shall be recognized as losses in valuing the Istisna’a costs and reported in the Islamic bank’s income statement, except if there is a reasonable degree of certainty that the Islamic bank shall recover these additional costs. (para. 22)
2/5 Change orders and additional claims
a) The value and cost of change orders authorized by the Islamic bank and Al-Mustasni’ shall be added to Istisna’a revenue and costs, respectively. (para. 23)



372





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

b) If requisite conditions for recognizing additional claims are met, a related amount  of revenue shall be recognized equal to the additional cost caused by such claims. (para. 24)
c) If one or more requisite conditions for recognizing additional claims are not met, the estimated value of these claims shall be disclosed in the notes accompanying the financial statements of the Islamic bank. (para. 25)
d) When a parallel Istisna’a exists, the accounting treatments in (a), (b) and (c) above shall apply for change orders and additional claims. However, the cost of change orders and additional claims are determined  by the subcontractor (Al-Sani’) in the parallel contract and subject to the approval of the Islamic bank. (para. 26)
2/6 Maintenance and warranty costs of Al-Masnoo’

a) Maintenance and warranty costs of Al-Masnoo’ shall be accounted for on an accrual basis. Such costs shall be estimated and then matched with recognized Istisna’a revenue. Actual maintenance and warranty expenditures shall be charged against a maintenance and warranty allowance account when carried out by the Islamic bank. (para. 27)
b) When a parallel Istisna’a exists, the maintenance and warranty cost of Al-Masnoo’ shall be accounted for on a cash basis, where such costs are charged by the Islamic bank directly to expense accounts when they are incurred. (para. 28)
3. Accounting Treatment of Istisna’a by the Islamic Bank As Al-Mustasni’ (A Buyer)
3/1 Istisna’a billings of completed jobs

a) The amount of progress billings received shall be recognized by debiting an Istisna’a costs account and presented under assets in the statement of financial position of the Islamic bank. The corresponding credit shall be made to Istisna’a accounts payable to Al-Sani’. (para. 29)
b) When a parallel Istisna’a exists, the accounting treatment in (a)
above shall apply. (para. 30)



373





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

3/2 Receipt of Al-Masnoo’

3/2/1 Receipt of Al-Masnoo’ in conformity with specifications and schedule
a) The received (Al-Masnoo’) assets shall be recorded at histo- rical cost (i.e., the book value) of the Istisna’a costs account. (para. 31)
b)When a parallel Istisna’a exists, and Al-Masnoo’ is delivered to the Al-Mustasni’ the balance of the Istisna’a costs account shall be transferred to an asset account that reflects the nature of Al-Masnoo’ received. (para. 32)
3/2/2 Late delivery of Al-Masnoo’

If the delay in the delivery of Al-Masnoo’ is due to the neg- ligence or fault of Al-Sani’ and the Islamic bank is entitled to compensation for damages resulting from the delay, the amount  of compensation shall be taken from performance bonds. If the amount of performance bonds is not sufficient to cover the amount  of compensation, the balance shall be recognized as Istisna’a accounts receivable due from Al-Sani’ and, if necessary, an allowance for doubtful debts account shall be formed. (para. 33)

3/2/3 Al-Masnoo’ not conforming to the specification
a) If the Islamic bank declined to receive Al-Masnoo’ due to nonconformity to specifications and did not recover the entire amount of progress payments made to Al-Sani’, the balance shall be recorded as Istisna’a accounts receivable, and if necessary, an allowance for doubtful debt account shall be formed. (para. 34)
b)If the Islamic bank accepted Al-Masnoo’ which does not conform to specifications, such assets shall be measured at the lower of their cash equivalent value or historical cost (the book value). Any resulting uncompensated loss shall be recognized in the Islamic bank’s income statement for the current financial period. (para. 35)



374





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

3/2/4 Al-Mustasni’ refuses to receive Al-Masnoo’

If Al-Mustasni’ (the client) refuses to receive Al-Masnoo’, the Istisna’a assets shall be measured at the lower of their cash equivalent value or historical cost (the book value). Any resulting loss shall be recognized in the Islamic bank’s income statement for the financial period in which the loss is realized. (para. 36)

4. Disclosure Requirements
4/1 The Islamic bank shall disclose the following in its financial statements:
a) Revenues and profits of Istisna’a contracts  recognized for the financial period. (para. 37)
b) Accounting methods used for measuring revenues and profits of
Istisna’a contracts for the financial period. (para. 38)
c) Cumulative (actual) costs of contracts in progress as well as reve- nues and profits recognized up to the end of the current financial period. (para. 39)
d) The amount  of retention  on contracts  in progress until they are completed according to the specifications and contractual conditions. (para. 40)
e) Istisna’a  receivable  and  payable  accounts  presented  in  the appropriate side of the statement  of financial position  of the Islamic bank. These accounts shall not be offset against each other. (para. 41)
4/2 The Islamic bank shall disclose the following in the notes accompa- nying its financial statements:
a) Unsettled additional claims and any contingent fines related to the penalty clauses concerning any delay in delivering Al-Masnoo’. (para. 42)
b) The method used for determining the percentage of completion for contracts in progress. (para. 43)
c) The value of parallel Istisna’a in progress and the time periods they span. (para. 44)
d) The value of Istisna’a contracts that the Islamic bank has signed during the current financial year, but has not yet commenced in executing them, and the time periods they span. (para. 45)



375





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

4/3 The disclosure requirements  in Financial Accounting  Standard No. (1): General Presentation and Disclosure in the Financial State- ments of Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions should be observed. (para. 46)

5. Effective Date
This Standard shall be effective for the financial statements for fiscal peri- ods beginning 1 Muharram 1420 A.H. or 1 January 1999 A.D. (para. 47)














































376





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a





Adoption of the Standard


The standard of Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a was adopted by the Ac- counting and Auditing Standards Board in its meeting No. (15) held on
27-28 Safar 1419 A.H, corresponding to 21-22 June 1998 A.D.

Members of the Board
1. Abdul-Malik Yousef Al-Hamar                         Chairman
2. Noorur-Rahman Abid                                      Deputy Chairman
3. Dr. Ahmed Ali Abdallah
4. Anwar Khalifa Sadah
5. Dr. Hussein Hussein Shehata
6. Farahat Saeed
7. Salahel-Din Ali Abu Naga
8. Salahel-Din El-Iskandarani
9. Dr. Abdul-Sattar Abu Ghoddah
10. Mohammed Alawi Thiban
11. Mustapha Bin Hamat
12. Musa Abdel-Aziz Shehadeh
13. Nabil Abdul-Elah Nassief






















377





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a





Appendix (A)
Examples of the Application of Some Aspects of the Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a Standard


The purpose of this appendix is to illustrate the application of certain aspects of the standard  to Istisna’a and parallel Istisna’a. The appendix does not form part of the standard. Paragraph numbers refer to those in the standard.

Example (1): Parallel Istisna’a Does Not Exist: (profitable contract) Basic data:
■ Contract price 500,000 (2-year contract)
■ Total estimated (and actual) contract costs $400,000 (including pre- contract costs of $15,000).

Year 1                            Year 2

Cumulative costs incurred              300,000                         400,000
(including pre-contract costs)

Billings                                           280,000                         220,000

Collections from Al-Mustasni’
(Purchaser)                                     230,000                         270,000














378





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

Treatments by the Islamic Bank As a Seller (Al-Sani’)


Para. No.
Year 1                    Year 2

Dr          Cr          Dr          Cr

3      1. Istisna’a work-in-progress         300,000                 100,000

4           Deferred cost                                           15,000

Cash (accounts payable, etc.)                  285,000                 100,000

3      2. Istisna’a accounts receivable     280,000                 220,000

Istisna’a billings                                       280,000                 220,000

3. Cash                                          230,000                 270,000

Istisna’a accounts receivable                   230,000                 270,000


End of period:
a) Percentage-of-completion can be estimated with reasonable accuracy
(percentage-of-completion method).

Para.
No.                                                                Year 1                            Year 2

8      % of completion                300,000/400,000 X 100=75%           25% Revenue recognized            500,000 X 75% = 375,000           125,000
Istisna’a revenue               (500,000 – 400,000) X 75% =
75,000


Dr              Cr            Dr           Cr

9      Cost of Istisna’a revenue          300,000                      100,000

Istisna’a work-in-progress         75,000                        25,000

Istisna’a revenue                                         375,000                    125,000





379





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

Income statement:

Year 1                            Year 2

Istisna’a revenue                                    375,000                         125,000

Cost of Istisna’a revenue                        300,000                         100,000

Istisna’a profit                                         75,000                           25,000


Balance sheet presentation:

Para.



(*)
No.                    Assets                        end of year 1             end of year 2

3      Istisna’a work-in-progress             375,000                          25%

3      Less: Istisna’a billings                   (280,000)                     125,000

95,000(**)                                                  — Istisna’a revenue                             50,000                            —
b) Percentage-of-completion cannot be estimated with reasonable accuracy
(completed contact method)



Para.
Year 1                        Year 2
No.                                                         Dr              Cr            Dr           Cr

10     Cost of Istisna’a revenue               —                           400,000

Istisna’a work-in-progress            —                           100,000

Istisna’a revenue                                             —                        500,000


(*)   Istisna’a transactions are concluded and all Istisna’a related accounts are closed by the end of year 2.
(**)  If the balance in Istisna’a billings is greater than Istisna’a work-in-progress, the two balances will be presented and matched within the liability section.



380





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

Income statement:

Year 1                           Year 2

Istisna’a revenue                                           —                             500,000

Cost of Istisna’a revenue                              —                             400,000

Istisna’a profit                                               —                             100,000


Balance sheet presentation:

Para.
No.                    Assets                        end of year 1              end of year 2*

3      Istisna’a work-in-progress             300,000

3      Less: Istisna’a billings                   (280,000)



Istisna’a accounts
20,000                            —
receivable                                       50,000                            —




























381





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

Example (2): Parallel Istisna’a Exists: (profitable contract)

Basic data:


Istisna’a Contract          Parallel Istisna’a

Contract price (2-year contract)             500,000                         400,000


Para.
No.                         Assets                        Year 1     Year 2     Year 1     Year 2
Billings by (Al-Sani’)
subcontractor (x-co.)                                                    300,000  100.000
Billings by Islamic bank to (Al-
Mustasni’) purchaser (y-co.)          280,000  220,000

3      Payments to x-co.                                                         290,000  110,000

4      Collections from y-co.                   230,000  270,000


Treatments by the Islamic Bank As Both a Seller (Al-Sani’) and a Buyer

(Al-Mustasni’) in Parallel Istisna’a



Para.
Year 1                   Year 2
No.                                                                 Dr          Cr          Dr          Cr

5       1. Istisna’a costs                              300,000                100,000

Istisna’a accounts payable
(x-co.)                                                      300,000                100,000
2. Istisna’a accounts receivable
(y-co.)                                        280,000                220,000

Istisna’a billings                                         280,000                220,000

3. Istisna’a accounts payable
(x-co.)                                        290,000                110,000

Cash                                                          290,000                110,000

4      Cash                                                230.000                270,000

Istisna’a accounts receivable
(y-co.)                                                          230,000                270,000



382





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

End of period:
Only percentage-of-completion method is applicable with parallel Istisna’a. (para. 16)



Para.
Year 1                        Year 2
No.                                                         Dr              Cr            Dr           Cr

17     Cost of Istisna’a revenue          300,000                      100,000

Istisna’a costs                            75,000                        25,000

Istisna’a revenue                                         375,000                    125,000

Income statement:

Year 1                           Year 2

Istisna’a revenue                                     375,000                         125,000

Cost of Istisna’a revenue                        300,000                         100,000

Istisna’a profit                                          75,000                           25,000


Balance sheet presentation:

Para.
No.                                                      end of year 1               end of year 2

3           Assets

Istisna’a costs                                 375,000

3      Less: Istisna’a billings                   (280,000)



Istisna’a accounts
95,000
receivable                                       50,000                            — Liabilities

40     Istisna’a accounts payable              10,000                            —






383





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

Example (3): Anticipated Losses on Contract

Assume a 3-year $8 million contract. Contract costs incurred through
1997, the second year of the contract, was $5,700,000. At the end of 1997, the estimated remaining contract cost to complete the contract was $2,500,000.
■ Anticipated loss at end of 1997 = 8,000,000 - (5,700,000 + 2,500,000) =
$200,000.
■ Valuation of Istisna’a work-in-progress at the end of 1997 = 8,000,000 -
2,500,000 = $5,500,000 (para.19).
a) If percentage-of-completion method is used
Assume gross profit recognized in 1996 was $600,000. The balance of
Istisna’a work-in-progress through 1997 and the valuation loss will be:


Construction costs incurred through 1997                          $5,700,000

Gross profit recognized in 1996                                            $600,000

Istisna’a work-in-progress balance (immediately
before valuation at end of 1997)                                           $6,300,000

Required valuation (para.19)                                                $5,500,000

Loss recognized at end of 1997 (para. 20)                            $800,000(*)

Adjusting entry at end of 1997

Loss on Istisna’a contracts                                            800,000

Istisna’a work-in-progress                                            800,000













(*) Reversal of $600,000 gross profit recognized in 1996 plus the $200,000 anticipated loss on the contract.



384





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

b) If completed contract method is used:
Under this method no profit is to be recognized until the contract is completed (para.10). Thus, the balance in the Istisna’a costs account through  1997 immediately before end of year adjustments  will be
$5,700,000, and the valuation  of this account  should  not  exceed
$5,500,000 (para.19).

Adjusting entry at end of 1997 to recognize anticipated loss on contract
(para. 20):

Loss on Istisna’a contracts                                            200,000

Istisna’a work-in-progress                                            200,000


(Same treatment applies for loss in the case of parallel Istisna’a, except for replacing Istisna’a costs account for Istisna’a work-in-progress account and only percentage-of-completion method is applied).
































385





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a





Appendix (B)
Brief History of
the Preparationof the Standard


On 30 Jumada I, 1416 A.H., corresponding to 24 October 1995 A.D., a letter was sent to the Islamic banks to seek their opinion on the standards to be given priority. After taking into consideration the replies from the Islamic banks, the Accounting and Auditing Standards Board decided in its meeting No. (10) held on 14-16 Ramadan 1416 A.H., corresponding to 3-5
February 1996 A.D., in Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, to give priority to the preparation of a standard on Istisna’a and parallel Istisna’a.

On 1 Dhul-Qa’dah 1417 A.H., corresponding to 10 March 1997 A.D., two consultants were commissioned to prepare the preliminary studies on the juristic and accounting aspects of the standard. These studies were dis- cussed in the Accounting Standards Committee meeting No. (11), held on
7 Safar 1418 A.H., corresponding to 12 June 1997 A.D., in Bahrain. The revised juristic and accounting studies as well as an exposure draft of the standard were discussed by the Committee in its meeting No. (12) held during the period of 13-14 Jumada I, 1418 A.H., corresponding to 14-15
September 1997 A.D., in Bahrain. In its meeting No. (13) held during the period of 12-13 Jumada II, 1418 A.H., corresponding to 13-14 October
1997 A.D., in Doha, the Committee reviewed and discussed the revised exposure draft of the standard and necessary amendments were made in light of the discussions that took place and the comments  made by the members.

The exposure draft was submitted to the Shari’a Committee in its meeting
No. (8), held on 13-15 Rajab, 1418 AH., corresponding to 13-15 November,
1997 A.D., in Bahrain, and the amendments which it deemed necessary were made.



386





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

The amended  exposure draft was discussed in the Standards Board meeting  No. (14) held on 11-12 Ramadan  1418 A.H., corresponding to 10-11 January 1998 A.D., in Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The Standards Board made further  amendments  to the exposure draft and decided that it should be distributed to specialists and interested parties to obtain their comments on the exposure draft in order to discuss them in a listening session.

Two listening sessions were held, one in Pakistan on 18 Dhul-Hajjah
1418 A.H., corresponding to 15 April 1998 A.D., and the other in Bahrain on 22 Dhul-Hajjah 1418 A.H., corresponding  to 19 April 1998 A.D. The listening sessions were attended by more than 230 participants representing central banks, Islamic banks, accounting firms, Shari’a scholars, academics and others who are interested in this field. Members of the Accounting Standards Committee responded in the listening sessions as well as the oral comments that were expressed in the sessions of the listening sessions.

The Accounting Standards Committee held a meeting on 22 Dhul-Hajjah
1418 A.H., corresponding to 19 April 1998 A.D., to discuss the comments made about the exposure draft. The Committee made the necessary amend- ments which it deemed necessary in light of the discussions that took place in the two listening sessions.

The revised exposure draft was reviewed and approved by the Shari’a
Committee in its meeting No. (8) which was held on 18-19 Muharram 1419
A.H., corresponding to 14-15 May 1998 A.D., after making some changes to the draft.
The Accounting and Auditing Standards Board adopted the proposed standard in its meeting No. (15) held on 27-28 Safar 1419 A.H., corresponding to 21-22 June 1998 A.D.












387





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a





Appendix (C)
Juristic Rules for Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a


1. Characterisation of Istisna’a

According  to the majority  of Fuqaha  (juristic  scholars), Istisna’a is a special type of Salam contract, which is used mainly in the field of manufacturing. Hence, according to this viewpoint, Istisna’a is subject to the same provisions and rules as those regulating the contract  of Salam.(5)

It should, however, be noted that the emergence of Istisna’a as a separate and independent contract is a result of jurisprudential engineering of the Hanafi school as presented in “Majallat Al-Ahkam Al-’Adliyyah” and the resolution of the Islamic Figh Academy.(6) This study is, therefore, based on the provisions of the Istisna’a contract as developed in the Hanafis’ jurisprudence and the subsequent development from within that jurisprudence and from other contemporary jurists.

2. Definition
Istisna’a is a sale contract between Al-Mustasni’ (the buyer) and Al-Sani’ (the seller), whereby Al-Sani’- based on an order from Al-Mustasni’-

(5) Al-Dardir, “Al-Sharh Al-Saghir ’Ala Aqrab Al-Masalik Ila Mazhab Al-lmam Malik”, published along with “Hashiyat  Al-Sawi”,  [3: 287-289], Dar Alma’arif:  Cairo 1932
A.D.; Ibn Qudamah, “Al-Mughni”, [3: 313], Modern Riyad Library, Saudi Arabia, 1401
A.H./1981 A.D., Al-Darir, Al-Siddiq M.A., “Al-Gharar Wa Atharaho Fi Al-’Uqud”, 2nd edition, Jeddah: Salih Kamil Series of Doctorate Theses on Islamic Economics, 1995
A.D.; Al-Zuhayli, Wahbah, “Al-Fiqh Al-Islami Wa Adillatuh,” Dar Al-Fikr, Beirut 1409
A.H., [4: 631-35].
(6) “Majallat Al-Ahkam Al-’Adliyyah”, Istisna’a Contract; Islamic Fiqh Acadamy, Session No. (7), Resolution No. (67/3/7) held on 7-12 Dhul-Qa’dah 1412 A.H., corresponding to 9-14 May, 1992 A.D.



388





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

undertakes to have manufactured or otherwise acquired Al-Masnoo’(7) (the subject matter of the contract) according to the specifications and sell it to Al-Mustasni’ for an agreed upon price and method of settlement whether that be in advance, by instalments or deferred to a specific future time.(8)    It is a condition  of the Istisna’a contract that Al-Sani’ should provide either the raw material or the labour.

3. Legitimacy of Istisna’a
3/1 According to the Hanafis, Istisna’a’ ought to have been prohibited for contravening the general Shari’a rules of Qiyas (analogical deduction). They base their argument  on the fact that the subject-matter of a contract of sale ought to be in existence and in possession of the seller, which is not the case in Istisna’a. The Hanafis have, nevertheless, approved  the Istisna’a contract  on the basis of Istihsan (juristic approbation) for the following reasons:
a) People have been practicing Istisna’a widely and continuously without condemnation, to the extent of furnishing a case of Ijma’ (Consensus).
b) It is possible in Shari’a to depart from Qiyas based on Ijma’.
c) The validity of Istisna’a is called for on grounds of need. People are often in need of commodities that are not available in the market, and hence, they would tend to enter into contracts to have the goods manufactured for them.(9)
3/2 Istisna’a is also valid in accordance  with the general rule of the permissibility of contracts as long as this does not contravene any text or rule of Shari’a.(2)

3/3 Some contemporary Fuqaha are of the view that Istisna’a is valid on the basis of Qiyas and the general rules of Shari’a because the fact that the subject-matter is non-existent at the time of the constitution of the contract is compensated  for by its preponderant existence

(7) The subject matter may be a commodity, service or both.
(8) Abdullah, Ahmad Ali, The Juristic Rules of the contract  of Istisna’a  and  Parallel
Istisna’a,  Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial Institutions,
1418 A.H.-1996 A.D., (pp. 2-8).
(9) Al-Sarakhsi, “Al-Mabsut”, [12: 138-139], Dar Al-Ma’rifah, Beirut.



389





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

at the time of delivery in the future. This arrangement  makes the delivery of the subject-matter free from Gharar (uncertainty).(10)

4. Conditions for the Validity of Istisna’a(11)
For the validity of Istisna’a, the following rules should be fulfilled:

4/1 Al-Masnoo’

4/1/1 Al-Masnoo’ must be known and specified to the extent of removing any lack of knowledge of its:
a) Kind, e.g., car, airoplane or house, etc.;
b)Type, e.g., a Toyota car, a Boeing airoplane, a house for low income individuals, etc.;
c) Quality, e.g., as specified according to established tables of specifications; and
d) Quantity.
4/1/2 The Hanafis stipulate that the commodity contracted for ought to be of a type of items that people are used to dealing with through Istisna’a. This is important because the legitimacy of Istisna’a is based, according to their viewpoint, on the customary practices of people.

However, since the legitimacy of Istisna’a is also based on Qiyas, general rules of Shari’a, permissibility of whatever has not been considered illegitimate, and Maslaha (consideration of the public good or common need), it is therefore considered a permissible contract to be used whenever the need arises irrespective to whether or not it has been commonly practised by people.

4/1/3 Fixing a date for delivering Al-Masnoo’

There are three opinions  in the Hanafis School relating to fixing a date for delivering Al-Masnoo’.
a) Imam Abu Hanifa prevented fixing any future date for the delivery of Al-Masnoo’. If a date is fixed, then the contract turns into Salam because this is a characteristic of a binding

(10) Al-Darir, M.S.A., op. cit., (P. 466).
(11) Al-Kasani, “Bada`i’ As-Sana`i’ Fi Tartib As-Shara`i’”, Cairo, [5: 2-3].



390





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a














































4/2 Price
contract such as Salam, but not Istisna’a which is open for options.
b) Abu Yusuf and Muhammad Ibn Al-Hasan Al-Shaybani, the companions  of Abu Hanifah, accepted the condition  of fixing a specific future delivery date on the ground  that people have been practicing Istisna’a in that manner.
c) However, Abu Hanifah and his two companions have agreed that in an Istisna’a contract if a delivery date is fixed and it is not in line with what is commonly practised, then the Istisna’a contract turns into a Salam contract.
This standard  accommodates the opinion of the two com- panions of Abu Hanifah who permit fixing a future delivery date. Therefore, fixing a future delivery date is a necessity. This is in line with both the ruling of the Committee of “Ma- jallat Al-Ahkam Al-’Adliyyah”, which stipulates that Istisna’a is a binding contract, and the resolution of the Islamic Fiqh Academy. This is based on for the following:
a) Al-Masnoo’ is a product that should either be manufactured or obtained from the market. Therefore, fixing a future de- livery date becomes a necessity in order to remove Gharar (uncertainty).
b) The future delivery date depends, on one hand, on the mutual agreement between the two parties involved and on the other hand, on the time required by Al-Sani’ to manufacture Al- Masnoo’ and/or to obtain Al-Masnoo’ from other parties according to the contract.
c) In Istisna’a contract, fixing a future delivery date is allowed when the need and necessity arise irrespective to whether or not it is commonly practised by people.

The price should be governed by the following rules:
a) It should be known to the extent of removing ignorance (i.e., lack of knowledge).
b) It cannot be increased or decreased on account of the normal increase or decrease in commodity prices or cost of labour.



391





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

Price may be changed by mutual consent of the contracting parties because of making modification in Al-Masnoo’ or due to unforeseen contingencies.

5. Binding Nature of Istisna’a
5/1 According to the majority of Hanafi jurists, Istisna’a is a valid but not binding contract. Hence,:

5/1/1 Each partner  has the option to rescind the contract before it is implemented. Al-Sani’ has the right not to commence manufacturing the goods, while Al-Mustasni’ has the right to withdraw from buying Al-Masnoo’.

5/1/2 If Al-Sani’ manufactured Al-Masnoo’, he would not be obliged to deliver it to Al-Mustasni’. Rather, he has the option  to dispense with it in the way he deems fit. This is because the contract is not for the manufactured goods themselves, but for Al-Masnoo’ of certain specifications. Al-Mustasni’ also has the option to accept Al-Masnoo’.

5/1/3 The Hanafis have three different views if Al-Sani’ manufac- tured Al-Masnoo’ according to the specifications and decided to deliver it to Al-Mustasni’ in fulfillment of his contractual obligations. These are:
a) The preponderant view is that the contract becomes binding on Al-Sani’ who has waived his option by delivering Al- Masnoo’. Yet, the buyer’s option remains to be exercised. This view is attributed to the three Imams:  Abu Hanifah, Abu Yusuf and Muhammad.
b)Abu Hanifah is also reported to have said that even at this stage Al-Sani’ retains his right on an equal footing with Al- Mustasni’.
c) Abu Yusuf is also reported to have expressed a second opinion to the effect that in this situation the contract becomes binding on the two parties.(12)

(12) Al-Sarakhsi, op. cit., [12: 139]; Al-Kasani, op. cit., [5: 3-4]; Al-Babarti, “Al-Inayah ’Ala
Al-Hidayah”, in “Fath Al-Qadir”, [7: 116].



392





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

5/2 The majority in the Hanafi School opined that the Istisna’a contract is binding once it has been constituted. A number of jurists have argued in favour of this view.(13)

5/3 Provision (392) of “Majallat Al-Ahkam Al-’Adliyyah” reads as follows:

Once the contract of Istisna’a is constituted, it becomes binding and no party has the right to revoke it. If, however, Al-Masnoo’ does not conform to the required specifications, Al-Mustasni’ has the option to revoke the contract. The commentator on the text says: Istisna’a is a contract of sale and not a mere promise. Once it is constituted, no party, according to Abu Yousuf ’s point of view, has the right to withdraw unless the consent of the other party is secured (see article
375). Accordingly, Al-Sani’ has to deliver Al-Masnoo’.(14)

5/4 In light of the above, all civil legislations based on Shari’a have treated Istisna’a, in line with the ruling of “Majallat Al-Ahkam Al-
’Adliyyah”, as a binding contract. These are the Jordanian, Yemeni and Sudanese laws of civil transactions as well as the Unified Arab Law proposed by the League of Arab Countries.

5/5 The Islamic Fiqh Academy has also decreed: “The contract of Istisna’a is binding on its parties provided that certain conditions are fulfilled.”

These views strengthen  one another  and confirm  that  there  is a substantiated viewpoint in the Hanafi school professing the bind- ing nature of Istisna’a once it is constituted. It is on this reality that the “Majallat Al-Ahkam  Al-’Adliyyah”, modern civil Islamic legis- lations and the Islamic Fiqh Academy developed their viewpoint, which is consistent with Shari’a rules and principles.

6. Legal Consequences of Istisna’a
According to the majority of Hanafi jurists, the legal consequences of Istisna’a are: (I) to transfer reciprocally title of ownership between

(13) Al-Tumurtashi, “Tanwir Al-Absar”, with “Hashiyat Radd Al-Muhtar”, [5: 223-224]
1386 A.H.; Al-Mihbat Al-Bourhati, Manuscript of Al-Awqaf Library, [2: 575-576] in
Al-Qaradaghi, A.M., Istisna’a Contract, 1997 A.D. (14) Al-Kasani, op. cit. [3: 3].



393





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

Al-Mustasni’ and Al-Sani’; and (II) to establish the entitlement of Al- Sani’ to the  agreed upon  amount  of the  contract.  This is because Istisna’a is a binding contract.(15)  This is the view adopted  by recent civil Islamic  legislations,  and  modern  transactions,  whereby  both the transfer of title of ownership is automatic and unconditional and Al-Sani’ is entitled to the agreed upon  amount  once the contract  is constituted.(16)

7. Guarantee

7/1 Al-Mustasni’ has the right to obtain collateral from Al-Sani’ for:

a) The total amount that he has paid.
b) The delivery of Al-Masnoo’ in accordance with the specifications and on due time.
7/2 Al-Sani’ also has the right to secure collaterals to guarantee that the price is payable on due time.(17)

8. Penalty Clause

It is permissible for Al-Mustasni’ to insert a penalty clause in the contract against unfulfillment of obligations by Al-Sani’.(18)

9. Options on Non-Compliance with Specifications

If Al-Masnoo’ is not in conformity with the specifications, Al-Mustasni’
has the following options:

a) Reject Al-Masnoo’, or
b) Accept it without seeking damages.

10. Termination of Istisna’a Contract

The contractof Istisna’a may be terminated under the following conditions:
a) Normal fulfillment of obligations by both parties. b) Mutual consent of both parties.

(15) Al-Kasani, op. cit. [3: 3].
(16) Abdullah, A.A., op. cit., (P. 59). (17) Abdullah, A.A., op. cit., (P. 59).
(18) Islamic Fiqh Academy, 7th   Session, Resolution No. (67/3/7), held on 7/12 Dhul- Qa’dah, 1412 A.H., corresponding to 9-14 May, 1992 A.D.



394





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

c) Judicial rescission of the contract. This is if a reasonable cause arises to prevent the execution of the contract or its completion, and each party may sue for its rescission.(19)
11. Parallel Istisna’a
If Al-Mustasni’ (the ultimate purchaser) did not stipulate in the contract that Al-Sani’ (the seller) should manufacture the Al-Masnoo’ by himself, then Al-Sani’ may enter into a second Istisna’a contract in order to fulfil his contractual obligations in the first contract. This new contract is known as parallel Istisna’a, which is in essence a subcontract whereby the obligation of Al-Sani’ in the first contract are carried out. Nevertheless,:
a) The Islamic bank as Al-Sani’ in the first contract will remain solely responsible for the execution of his obligations as if the parallel contract is nonexistent. Hence, Al-Sani’ in the first contract would remain liable for any default, negligence or breach of contract ensuing from the parallel contract.
b) Al-Sani’ in the parallel Istisna’a is accountable to Al-Mustasni’ (the Islamic bank) in the way and manner  by which he performs his obligations. He has no direct legal relationship with Al-Mustasni’ in the first contract. The second Istisna’a is a parallel contract, but not a contingent transaction on the first contract. Legally speaking they are different contracts with respect to the rights and obligations.
c) The Islamic bank as Al-Sani’ is liable to Al-Mustasni’ with regard to any mal-execution of the subcontractor and any guarantees arising therefrom. It is this very liability that justifies the validity of the parallel Istisna’a and which also justifies the charging of profit by the Islamic bank, if any.(20)










(19) See Recent Civil Islamic Legislations; Abdullah, A.A., op. cit, (pp. 61-62). (20) Abdullah, A.A., op. cit., (pp. 62-66).



395





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a





Similarities and Differences
Between Salam and Istisna’a


Subject              Salam              Istisna’a             Rules and Comments

1. Subject matter of the contract
Al-Muslam
Fihi               Al-Masnoo’

It is permissible to:
Deferred goods, known by specification.

The means of settlement


2. Price








3. Nature of

Paid at time of contracting
a) Pay it at time of contracting;
b) Defer it; or c) Pay it in
instalments.
(in advance, deferred, or instalments) constitute the main difference between Salam and Istisna’a.

Salam is originally binding on its parties, However, Istisna’a is considered binding based
contract               Binding        Binding
on the views of some
Fuqaha for the sake of Maslaha and for not contravening any Shari’a rule.
Both parallel Salam and parallel Istisna’a are valid provided that:
■ The  two contracts  are legally separated;
4. Parallel contract      Parallel
Salam

Parallel Istisna’a
■ The  legal relationship between the parties to each  contract  is sepa- rate; and
■ The rights and obliga- tions  of each  contract are separate.




396





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a





Appendix (D)
Reasons for the Standard


In their response to AAOIFI’s letter of 30 Jumada I, 1416 A.H., corre- sponding to 24 October 1995 A.D., the Islamic banks gave priority to the preparation of a standard, among others, on Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a. This was endorsed by the Accounting and Auditing Standards Board in its meeting No. (9) held on 24-25 Rabi’ II, 1416 A.H., corresponding to19-20
September 1995 A.D., in Bahrain.

Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a are important modes of financing used by the Islamic banks. The accounting treatments by the Islamic banks of Istisna’a and parallel Istisna’a give rise to numerous problems due to the multiplicity  of alternatives  available for the treatment of many issues. Among the issues that are susceptible to significant differences in the accounting treatment are:
■ Measurement and recognition of the costs of Istisna’a and parallel Istisna’a contracts.
■ Measurement and recognition of the revenues and profits of Istisna’a and parallel Istisna’a contracts.
■ Valuation of Istisna’a assets at the end of a financial period, especially when contract losses are expected.
■ Measurement and treatment of contract maintenance and warranty costs.
■ Scope and mode of disclosure of accounting information and policies relating to Istisna’a and parallel Istisna’a transactions in the financial statements of the Islamic bank.
Differences in the accounting treatments of such issues and their disclosure in the financial statements of the Islamic bank are expected to have adverse effects on the comparability of accounting information  presented in the



397





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

financial statements of Islamic banks. Thus, the standardisation of accounting treatments of Istisna’a and parallel Istisna’a transactions on bases consistent with Statement of Financial Accounting No. (1): Objectives of Financial Accounting for Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions  (Statement of Objectives), and the Statement of Financial Accounting No. (2): Concepts of Financial Accounting for Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions (Statement of Concepts) is necessary in order to provide useful information to users of the financial reports of these banks and for ensuring comparability of such information.











































398





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a





Appendix (E)
Basis for Conclusions


This appendix shows the alternatives taken into consideration when choosing the accounting treatment of Istisna’a and parallel Istisna’a and the justifications of the basis on which the chosen alternative was given preponderance.

The Accounting Standards Committee  has reviewed in its meetings a number of alternatives, and the alternatives proposed in the preliminary study(21)   to  be  adopted  in  the  accounting  treatments  of Istisna’a  and parallel Istisna’a. The Accounting Standards Committee recommended the adoption of the alternatives which were considered to be in compliance with the previous Statement of Financial Accounting No. (1): Objectives of Financial  Accounting  for Islamic Banks and  Financial  Institutions (Statement of Objectives), and the Statement of Financial Accounting No. (2): Concepts of Financial Accounting for Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions (Statement of Concepts).

Recognition of Istisna’a Profit
Two alternative treatments were proposed for the recognition of Istisna’a profit:
a) Percentage of completion method. According to this method, a por- tion of Istisna’a profit commensurate with the work completed during a period is recognized at the end of the period as a realized profit. That is, Istisna’a profit is allocated over the periods in which the contract is being executed in proportion to the work completed in each period. A crucial condition for applying this method is that the expected cost of completing the contract is estimated with reasonable accuracy.

(21) Abul-Izz, Muhammad  Al-Said, “A Study of the Accounting Aspects of Istisna’a and Parallel
Istisna’a”, Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial Institutions, 1418
A.H.-1997 A.D.



399





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

b) Completed contract method. According to this method, the entire contract costs and revenues of Istisna’a contract are recognized at the end of the financial period during which the contract is completed. The first alternative; i.e., percentage  of completion  method,  was chosen for the recognition of Istisna’a  and parallel Istisna’a  profit, provided that the contract costs can be estimated with reasonable accuracy. However, if the contract costs cannot be estimated with reasonable accuracy, the completed contract method should be used. The percentage of completion method is preferred because it provides for a better matching of Istisna’a revenues and expenses. Furthermore, it reflects in a more accurate manner  the outcome of the earning activities of Al-Sani’ (the Islamic bank) over the entire time period of contract execution, thereby presenting more relevant information to users of the financial statements.
Furthermore, the percentage of completion method enables investment accountholders to participate  in Istisna’a  profit  as long as they have a contractual  relationship  with the Islamic bank. However, postponing the recognition of revenue and profits until the contract is completed (i.e., using the completed contract method) denies investment accountholders from their share in Istisna’a profits should they withdraw their funds before the contractis completed. Therefore, the second alternative (the completed contract method) should be applied only in unusual circumstances, i.e., when the first alternative (the percentage of completion method) is not applicable.

Valuation of Istisna’a Assets at the End of a Financial Period

Two valuation bases were considered for measuring Istisna’a assets at the end of the financial period in the financial statements of Al-Sani’ (Islamic bank):
a) Historical cost of Istisna’a assets is represented by both the book value of the Istisna’a work-in-progress account in an Istisna’a contract or the book value of the Istisna’a costs account in the case of parallel Istisna’a.
b) Historical cost, as defined in alternative (a) above, provided it does
not exceed the cash equivalent value.



400





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

Alternative (b) was chosen because it allows timely recognition of any expected losses in the execution of the contract at the end of a financial period. Hence, Istisna’a assets would not be inflated as would happen if these assets were not written down to account for the expected losses. Thus, the chosen alternative provides more relevant information for users of the financial statements.

Maintenance and Product Warranty Costs of Al-Masnoo’

The following two alternatives of accounting for maintenance and warranty costs of Al-Masnoo’ were considered:
a) Accrual basis: According to this basis, maintenance and warranty costs expected to take place for each period are estimated and matched against the Istisna’a revenues recognized for the same period. When incurred, actual maintenance and warranty expenditures are charged against the maintenance and warranty allowance account.
b)Cash basis: According to this basis actual maintenance and warranty costs are charged against income for the financial period in which they take place.
The accrual basis (the first alternative) was chosen for Istisna’a contracts because it provides for a better matching of Istisna’a revenues and expenses. The cash basis (the second alternative), however, was chosen for parallel Istisna’a contracts based on the materiality concept because in a parallel Istisna’a such costs are born by Al-Sani’ (i.e., the subcontractor).





















401





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a





Appendix (F)
Definitions


Istisna’a

It is a sale contract between Al-Mustasni’ (the buyer) and Al-Sani’, (the seller) whereby Al-Sani’ - based on an order from Al-Mustasni’- undertakes to have manufactured or otherwise acquire Al-Masnoo’ (the subject matter of the contract) according to the specifications and sell it to Al-Mustasni’ for an agreed upon price and method of settlement whether that be at the time of contracting, by instalments or deferred to a specific future time. It is a condition of the Istisna’a contract that Al-Sani’ should provide either the raw material or the labour.

Parallel Istisna’a

If Al-Mustasni’ (the purchaser) does not stipulate in the contract that Al-Sani’ (the seller) should  manufacture  Al-Masnoo’ by himself, then Al-Sani’ may enter into a second Istisna’a contract in order to fulfil his contractual obligations in the first contract. The second contract is called Parallel Istisna’a.

Istisna’a Work-in-Progress Account

This is an asset account in which the Istisna’a contract costs are accu- mulated. When the percentage-of-completion method is used, a portion of Istisna’a profit commensurate with the work completed during a financial period is also debited to this account.

Istisna’a Costs Account
This is an asset account used when a parallel Istisna’a exists. It accumulates progress billings made by the subcontractor. A portion of the Istisna’a profit commensurate with the work completed during a financial period is also debited to this account.



402





Financial Accounting Standard No. (10): Istisna’a and Parallel Istisna’a

Percentage-of-Completion Method

An accounting method that recognizes the revenues and profits of Istisna’a contracts as work progresses.

Completed-Contract Method

An accounting method that recognizes Istisna’a costs and revenues only in the financial period in which the contract is completed.

Contract Losses

Losses expected to happen when the sum of the costs accumulated in the Istisna’a account or receivable Istisna’a billing accounts and the estimated additional costs for the completion of the contract exceed the price fixed in the Istisna’a contract.

Change Orders

Approved modifications in the specifications, quantities, design, or other attributes defined in the original Istisna’a contract the implementation of which affects the contract costs.

Additional Claims

Amounts in excess of the agreed Istisna’a contract price which are claimed by Al-Sani’ for delays, errors in the specifications and designs or other causes of unanticipated costs caused by Al-Mustasni’. Recognition of these claims by Al-Sani’ requires the satisfaction of the following conditions:
a) The existence of a legal basis for the additional claim supported by objective and verifiable evidence.
b) Claims must be due to circumstances  that were unforeseeable at the contract date and are not the result of the deficiencies, fault or negligence of Al-Sani’.
c) Costs associated with the additional claim are identifiable and reliably
estimable.










403

