





















IFSB-31

GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR EFFECTIVE SUPERVISION OF SHARĪʻAH GOVERNANCE


















July 2025
ABOUT THE ISLAMIC FINANCIAL SERVICES BOARD (IFSB)



The IFSB is an international standard-setting organisation which was officially inaugurated on 3

November 2002 and started operations on 10 March 2003. The organisation promotes and enhances the soundness and stability of the Islamic financial services industry by issuing global prudential standards and guiding principles for the industry, broadly defined to include the banking, capital markets, and insurance sectors. The standards prepared by the IFSB follow a stringent due process as outlined in its Guidelines and Procedures for the Preparation of Standards/Guidelines, which includes holding several Working Group meetings, issuing exposure drafts, and organising public hearings/webinars and reviews by the IFBS’s Sharīʻah Board and Technical Committee. The IFSB also conducts research and coordinates initiatives on industry-related issues and organises roundtables, seminars, and conferences for regulators and industry stakeholders. Towards this end, the IFSB works closely with relevant international, regional, and national organisations, research/educational institutions, and market players.


For more information about the IFSB, please visit  www.ifsb.org










































2
TABLE OF CONTENTS



ABBREVIATIONS .................................................................................................................................. 4

SECTION 1:   INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................................. 5

1.1.    Background .................................................................................................................................. 5

1.2.    Jurisdictional Differences .............................................................................................................. 5

1.3.    Objectives and Scope of the Standard ......................................................................................... 5

1.4.    Supervisory Powers and Authority................................................................................................ 6

1.5.    Applicability and Proportionality .................................................................................................... 6

SECTION 2:   GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR EFFECTIVE SUPERVISION OF SHARĪʻAH

GOVERNANCE    .................................................................................................................................. 9

2.1.    Guidance on Expectations for Sound Sharīʻah Governance ........................................................ 9

2.2.    Board of Directors and Senior Management .............................................................................. 10

2.3.    Sharīʻah Governance Framework (Organs of Governance)....................................................... 12

2.4.    Risk Management ....................................................................................................................... 14

2.5.    Disclosure and Transparency ..................................................................................................... 14

2.6.    Islamic Windows ......................................................................................................................... 15

2.7.    Group Structures......................................................................................................................... 15

2.8.    Outsourced Activities .................................................................................................................. 16

2.9.    Sharīʻah Screening ..................................................................................................................... 17

2.10.  Corrective Actions....................................................................................................................... 17

2.11.  Issuers of Sharīʻah-compliant Securities .................................................................................... 18

2.12.  Comprehensive Assessment of Sharīʻah Governance in IIFS (Supervisory Approach) ............ 18

2.13.  Requiring Improvement and Remedial Action by the IIFS.......................................................... 19

2.14.  Supervisory Resources and Capacity......................................................................................... 20

2.15.  Cooperation and Information-Sharing among Relevant Authorities ........................................... 20

DEFINITIONS       ................................................................................................................................ 22













3
ABBREVIATIONS




CPIFR                        Core Principles for Islamic Finance Regulation (Banking Segment) CPICM                        Core Principles for Islamic Capital Market Segment
IFSB                           Islamic Financial Services Board


IFSB-10                      Guiding Principles on Sharīʻah Governance Systems for Institutions Offering Islamic
Financial Services


IFSB-17                      Core Principles for Islamic Finance Regulation (Banking Segment)

IFSB-21                      Core Principles for Islamic Finance Regulation [Islamic Capital Market Segment] IFSB-30                      Revised Guiding Principles on Corporate Governance for Institutions Offering
Islamic Financial Services (Banking Segment)


IFSB-27                      Core Principles for Islamic Finance Regulation [Takāful Segment]


IIFS                             Institutions Offering Islamic Financial Services


TCP                            Takāful Core Principle


































4
SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION


1.1.     Background

1.         Weaknesses in Sharīʻah governance can adversely impact the overall risk profile of Institutions offering Islamic financial services (IIFS) through heightened operational risks such as legal and reputational risks that could result in financial and non-financial losses and the erosion of public trust. Moreover, failures at one institution can undermine market confidence and potentially trigger systemic risks.  Recognising these risks, setting supervisory expectations for effective Sharīʻah governance is important for the safe and sound functioning of IIFS. As such supervisory oversight of Sharīʻah governance is integral to the financial stability and consumer protection mandates of financial sector supervisors in all jurisdictions where IIFS are licensed, and it does not necessarily involve the assessment or issuance of Sharīʻah-compliance rulings by the supervisor.

2.         This standard complements the Guiding Principles on Sharīʻah Governance Systems for Institutions Offering Islamic Financial Services (IFSB-10). The standard provides guidance on the supervision of Sharīʻah governance, emphasising the importance of clear designation of authority, responsibility, and accountability, along with effective checks and balances among the various organs of governance.

3.         The guiding principles set out in this standard are consistent with the IFSB Core Principles, for the Islamic banking segment (IFSB-17), Islamic capital markets (IFSB-21), and the Takāful segment (IFSB-27). The principles take into consideration the alignment and interoperability of this Standard with the Principles for Corporate Governance of Islamic Banks (IFSB-30).


1.2.     Jurisdictional Differences

4.         Recognising the wide range of institutional structures and regulatory settings across member jurisdictions, this standard adopts a principle-based approach to the supervision of Sharīʻah governance.

5.         The standard recognises that there are significant differences in the legislative and regulatory frameworks across countries, as well as different approaches to Sharīʻah governance, which may affect the application of certain principles or provisions therein. Each jurisdiction should apply the provisions as the national authorities see fit. In some cases, this may involve legal change. In other cases, a principle may require a slight modification to be implemented.


1.3.     Objectives and Scope of the Standard

6.         The  standard  aims  to  provide  guidance  on  the supervision  of  Sharīʻah  governance  to strengthen the overall financial stability and resilience of the Islamic financial system.

7.         The scope of the standard focuses on effective supervision of Sharīʻah governance and does not intend to  duplicate Sharīʻah governance arrangements, already addressed in IFSB-10. This standard excludes general corporate governance-related issues that have been addressed in other IFSB standards (particularly IFSB-30). The principles set out in this document should be applied alongside other relevant IFSB standards.

8.         This standard is cross-sectoral in nature and applies to banks, insurance companies, and other non-bank financial institutions (e.g., asset managers), collectively referred to as Institutions offering




5
Islamic financial services (IIFS), as well as issuers1 in Islamic capital markets. Any variations in the applicability of specific principles to certain sectors are explicitly addressed within the principles.


1.4.     Supervisory Powers and Authority

9.         The  responsibility of  supervisors for  Sharīʻah  governance supervision may  differ  across jurisdictions due to differences in legal and regulatory environments and the approach to Islamic finance regulation. In some jurisdictions, the legal framework explicitly grants supervisors the necessary powers, authority, and resources to oversee Sharīʻah governance in the Islamic financial system. In others, a market-driven approach has been adopted, where the responsibility of Sharīʻah governance is left to the IIFS or issuers and market forces.

10.       Effective implementation of  sound  Sharīʻah governance requires a  supportive legal  and regulatory foundation. Supervisors are encouraged to be aware of any barriers to sound Sharīʻah governance, even  those  beyond  their  direct  scope.  They  should  take  steps  to  foster  effective foundations where possible and advocate for necessary legislative or regulatory reforms where needed.

11.       Where supervisors have limited or no responsibility to oversee the Sharīʻah governance of IIFS, they can implement key aspects of this standard through their consumer protection and market integrity mandates requiring appropriate disclosure of Sharīʻah compliance aspects as well as through market conduct supervision, which can incorporate assessment of Sharīʻah governance practices in IIFS.


1.5.     Applicability and Proportionality

12.       The implementation of these principles should be commensurate with the size, complexity and nature of the Islamic financial system in a jurisdiction. Supervisors have the flexibility to tailor their approach to suit local market realities. However, the application of proportionality should not compromise the robustness of Sharīʻah governance.

13.       This standard intends to provide guidance on minimum benchmarks for effective supervision of Sharīʻah governance. Jurisdictions have the discretion to implement additional or more stringent measures based on their specific circumstances and risk assessments.

14.       IFSB standards and guiding principles draw upon and complement one another and form a coherent prudential framework. The guidance in this standard does not, in any manner, contradict or supersede the recommendations relating to the Sharīʻah Governance that have been mentioned in other IFSB standards and guiding principles.


1.6.     Implementation Date

15.       To promote consistency in the supervision of Sharīʻah governance across jurisdictions, it is recommended that supervisors implement the standard by January 2027, allowing for an adequate pre- implementation period from the date of issuance. Supervisors are encouraged to adopt the standard
earlier, where they are able to do so.







1 For non-financial institutions issuing Islamic capital market instruments, this standard applies only to the Shariah governance  arrangements  related  to  their  Sharīʻah-compliant  securities  issued  (other  than  the  issuance of shares/stock) and the issuance processes, not to the institution's overall operations or business activities.

6


Principles and Applicability





Principles





Principle 1 (Supervisory Expectations): Supervisors should establish guidance or rules requiring IIFS and issuers to have appropriate Sharīʻah governance policies and practices.

•      •     •


Principle 2 (Board and Senior Management): Supervisors should establish expectations regarding the responsibilities of the IIFS’ Board and senior management with respect to Sharīʻah governance to ensure there is effective control over the IIFS’s entire business.



Principle 3 (Sharīʻah Governance Framework): Supervisors should determine that IIFS have implemented the essential elements of Sharīʻah governance.


Principle 4 (Risk Management): Supervisors should require IIFS to integrate
Sharīʻah principles and guidelines set by the relevant Sharīʻah governance organ
(or a central Sharīʻah authority or national regulation) into their risk management         •      •
framework to identify, measure, and mitigate Sharīʻah non-compliance risks, with
clear escalation procedures for timely corrective actions2.

Principle 5 (Disclosure and Transparency): Supervisors should conduct periodic reviews of the adequacy and effectiveness of IIFS and issuers’ Sharīʻah governance disclosures, assessing the comprehensiveness, clarity, and
timeliness of information.


•      •     •


Principle 6 (Islamic Windows): Supervisors should expect the Board to take
the overall responsibility for ensuring the establishment and effective operation            •      •
of a robust Sharīʻah governance framework for Islamic windows.


Principle 7 (Group Structures): In a group structure, supervisors should expect the parent Board to have in place relevant Sharīʻah governance policies and exercise adequate oversight over Islamic subsidiaries in a manner appropriate to
the structure and risks of the entities and the group.





2 Corrective action refers to rectification of Sharīʻah non-compliant income, for example through divestment of non- compliant investment and/or purification of non-compliant income.

7

Principle 8 (Outsourced Activities): Supervisors should require that IIFS and issuers, maintain full responsibility for Sharīʻah compliance even where activities
are outsourced.


•      •     •



Principle 9 (Screening): Supervisors should determine that IIFS implement and
maintain adequate policies, processes and controls to ensure ongoing                         •      •
compliance of investments with approved screening criteria.


Principle 10 (Corrective Actions): Supervisors should determine that IIFS and issuers have established adequate processes for monitoring and addressing Sharīʻah non-compliance, with clear policies and procedures for the rectification of Sharīʻah non-compliance.


•      •     •

Principle 11 (Issuers of Sharīʻah-compliant securities): Supervisors should determine that issuers of Sharīʻah-compliant securities have in place appropriate mechanisms for obtaining approval from a relevant Sharīʻah authority prior to issuance and, where needed, post-issuance, as well as have policies and procedures for corrective actions in the event of a change in compliance status.
Principle 12 (Supervisory Approach): Supervisors should regularly conduct comprehensive evaluations of an IIFS and issuer’s Sharīʻah governance framework and its implementation and determine that the IIFS have robust policies and processes commensurate with its risk profile and systemic
importance.


•





•     •     •


Principle 13 (Enforcement and Remedial Action): Supervisors should require
IIFS and issuers to correct deficiencies in a timely manner.
•     •     •




Principle 14 (Supervisory Resources and Capacity): Supervisors should ensure that they have adequate resources and capacity to effectively assess IIFS and issuer’s Sharīʻah Governance and related risks.

•     •     •


Principle 15 (Cooperation and Information-sharing): Supervisors should establish and maintain mechanisms for cooperation and information sharing with other relevant domestic and foreign supervisory authorities to facilitate
comprehensive oversight of Sharīʻah governance practices.


•     •     •

















8
SECTION 2:   GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR EFFECTIVE SUPERVISION OF SHARĪʻAH GOVERNANCE


2.1.     Guidance on Expectations for Sound Sharīʻah Governance

Principle 1: Supervisors should establish guidance or rules requiring IIFS and issuers to have appropriate Sharīʻah governance policies and practices.

16.       Supervisors should establish guidance or rules consistent with the principles set forth in this document and other relevant IFSB standards,3  requiring IIFS and issuers to have robust Sharīʻah governance policies and processes that ensure effective and independent oversight. Such guidance is especially important where national laws, regulations, codes or listing requirements do not fully address the specific Sharīʻah governance needs of IIFS and Sharīʻah-compliant securities markets.

17.       Supervisory guidance or rules should address, among other things, expectations for checks and balances and a clear allocation of responsibilities, accountability and transparency in the adopted Sharīʻah governance framework. In addition to guidance or rules, supervisors are encouraged to share, where appropriate, industry best practices regarding Sharīʻah governance with the IIFS they supervise.

18.       Different jurisdictions may adopt varying institutional approaches to Sharīʻah governance oversight. Some jurisdictions may decide to rely on centralised bodies, where the supervisors may establish a central Sharīʻah authority at the supervisory level, or rely on a national Sharīʻah authority.4
Alternatively, supervisory authorities may only require Sharīʻah Boards at the IIFS level.

19.       Where  centralised  institutional  arrangements are  adopted,  they  should  be  subject  to  a governance framework similar to that applied to IIFS’ Sharīʻah boards, including, inter alia, safeguarding independence and resources, ensuring members’ competencies, and mitigating any potential conflicts of interest.

20.       Supervisors should provide guidance or rules on the general approach to Sharīʻah governance in its jurisdiction and lay down key elements of the process. Supervisors should provide guidance to IIFS on minimum fit and proper criteria for the Board, senior management, the organs of Sharīʻah governance and other key control functions of an IIFS. 5

21.       In jurisdictions where a central or national Sharīʻah authority is present, supervisors should provide guidance on the status, roles and applicability of Sharīʻah pronouncements issued by such authorities within their supervisory framework and any expectations for IIFS to demonstrate compliance
with such pronouncements6.










3 See  IFSB-10,  IFSB-17 (CPIFR 16),  IFSB-21 (CPICM 10) and  IFSB-27 (TCP 8)
4  A Central Shariah Authority is established within a regulatory or supervisory body under its purview, while a
National Shariah Authority is typically established by national legislation or government and independent of regulatory or supervisory authority.
5 For guidance on minimum fit and proper criteria for Sharīʻah board members, refer to IFSB-10 Principle 2.1 and
Appendix 4 and IFSB-30.
6   In some jurisdictions, central  or national Sharīʻah authorities  are  advisory in nature, whereas, in others,
pronouncements issued by such authorities are considered binding.

9
2.2.     Board of Directors and Senior Management

Principle 2: Supervisors should establish expectations regarding the responsibilities of IIFS’s Board and senior management with respect to Sharīʻah governance to ensure there is effective control over the IIFS’s entire business.

Board of directors

22.       Supervisors should determine that the Board of an IIFS demonstrate clear accountability for the institution's Sharīʻah governance framework as an integral part of its overall governance responsibilities. The IIFS’s Board bears ultimate responsibility for the establishment and oversight of Sharīʻah governance.

23.       Supervisors should require that the IIFS’s Board approve and oversee the implementation of the Sharīʻah governance framework and related policies and establish conflicts of interest policies for any  arising  in  the  Sharīʻah  governance framework  and  a  strong  risk  management and  control environment. This framework should define clear lines of responsibility and accountability, including mechanisms for obtaining and implementing Sharīʻah pronouncements, verifying ongoing compliance, and promoting transparency in Sharīʻah-related matters. The Board should be expected to ensure that the various organs of Sharīʻah governance have the necessary authority, independence, and resources to fulfil their responsibilities effectively.

24.       Supervisors should assess whether the IIFS’s Board is suitably qualified and competent to undertake responsibilities related to Sharīʻah governance. The Board should be expected to collectively possess sufficient knowledge and experience in Islamic finance (including sector-specific knowledge) and a thorough understanding of Sharīʻah governance processes for effective oversight. Supervisors may determine that there are policies in place to ensure the continuous professional development of Board members in Islamic finance and to stay abreast of industry developments.

25.       Supervisors should determine that the IIFS’s Board (a) has established adequate fit and proper criteria, taking into account the need for knowledge and understanding of Islamic finance, in selecting senior management, Sharīʻah board members and heads of the control functions; (b) has developed effective processes to allocate authority, responsibility and accountability within the IIFS on Sharīʻah governance matters; and (c) is actively and critically overseeing senior management’s execution of the Sharīʻah governance policies and framework, and monitoring the performance of senior management and heads of the control function against the Sharīʻah governance standards established for them.

26.       Supervisors should determine that an IIFS Board has specified and adopted a formal process for assessment of the performance of the Sharīʻah board and the other organs of Sharīʻah governance, both individually as well as the overall performance of the Shariah governance framework as a whole.

27.       Supervisors should expect the Board to oversee the development and implementation of training programs to enhance Sharīʻah governance competencies within the institution and for continuous professional development, including for senior management, organs of Sharīʻah governance, key control functions and other relevant staff.

28.       Supervisors should require the Board to periodically assess the effectiveness of the Sharīʻah governance framework to ensure its continued relevance in light of changes in the institutions business activities, market practices, and regulatory requirements and broader operating environment.

29.       Supervisors should determine that the Board has established mechanisms for regular and effective communication, ensuring that Sharīʻah-related matters are given due consideration in the institution's decision-making processes. This should include consideration of how information flows to


10
and from the Board, senior management and organs of Sharīʻah governance and how potentially serious Sharīʻah compliance problems are identified and addressed throughout the IIFS.

30.       Supervisors should determine that the Board has embedded a robust Sharīʻah compliance environment across all levels of the IIFS, fostering an environment where such compliance is prioritised and actively reinforced through a holistic culture of accountability and well-defined mechanisms for raising Sharīʻah governance concerns.

31.       Where IIFS conducts an independent external Sharīʻah audit, supervisors should require the Board to have in place a robust process for approving the appointment, reappointment, removal and remuneration of the external Sharīʻah auditor. The Board should be expected to monitor and assess the independence of the external Sharīʻah auditor, as well as the effectiveness7 of the external Sharīʻah audit.

Senior Management

32.       Supervisors should determine that the senior management of an IIFS has clear lines of accountability for implementing Sharīʻah governance policies and practices as determined by regulations and/or established by the Board, ensuring the timely implementation and ongoing adherence to issued Sharīʻah pronouncements. Supervisors should require senior management to ensure the timely and effective resolution of internal and external Sharīʻah audit findings by implementing necessary corrective actions and addressing any identified weaknesses.

33.       Supervisors should require that the Sharīʻah governance organs (including any Sharīʻah board established at the IIFS level) have appropriate access to the senior management of the IIFS for all the information it needs.  Clear procedures should be established for information sharing between senior management and Sharīʻah governance organs, ensuring that the information flow respects confidentiality obligations while ensuring Sharīʻah governance organs can perform their functions effectively. The senior management should facilitate the effective functioning of the Sharīʻah governance system by providing complete, accurate and adequate information to the Sharīʻah governance organs  in  a  timely  manner  and  enabling  direct  and  independent access  to  senior management to obtain any additional information they deem necessary to fulfil their duties and responsibilities.

34.       Supervisors should expect senior management to implement and regularly update effective internal risk and control systems to monitor and ensure compliance with Sharīʻah principles across all operations, addressing emerging Sharīʻah compliance risks and changes in the institution's business model or operating environment. Adequate systems and controls should be implemented to manage conflicts of interest, including identification of potential conflicts, implementation of mitigation measures, and transparent disclosure where necessary. Supervisors should expect senior management to support the effective implementation of the Sharīʻah governance framework by allocating adequate resources, including qualified personnel, systems, and funding. Senior management should ensure that key
personnel receive ongoing training and professional development in Islamic finance.










7 This includes determining whether the external Sharīʻah audit approach is appropriate, including considerations relating to the audit scope, the level of materiality, areas of focus and how the auditor proposes to address the areas of significant risks.

11
2.3.     Sharīʻah Governance Framework (Organs of Governance)

Principle 3: Supervisors should determine that IIFS have implemented the essential elements of
Sharīʻah governance.

35.       Supervisors should require that each IIFS has a properly functioning Sharīʻah governance system in place, which clearly demonstrates, among other things, well-defined roles and responsibilities8  and  operating procedures for the  organs of  Sharīʻah governance9. The specific composition, roles, and interactions of these organs may vary across jurisdictions. Regardless of the specific arrangement, these organs should collectively aim to maintain the integrity of Islamic financial operations, ensure consistent compliance with Sharīʻah principles, and contribute to the IIFS’s sound risk management and internal control systems. Supervisors should ensure that the oversight of the Sharīʻah governance organs is comprehensive in respect of all Sharīʻah-related matters of an IIFS. Supervisors should verify that the Sharīʻah governance system established by the IIFS is commensurate with the size, nature, and complexity of the institution.

36.       Supervisors should determine that IIFS have in place appropriate processes and mechanisms for obtaining rulings (i.e. Sharīʻah pronouncements/resolutions) from a relevant authority, applying such rulings across the IIFS’s activities, and monitoring Sharīʻah compliance in all aspects of their business operations through Sharīʻah reviews or audits, as well as integration of these processes with broader risk management and control mechanisms to mitigate non-compliance risks.

37.       Supervisory expectations should aim to strengthen consistency and transparency of the processes for obtaining Sharīʻah rulings in order to mitigate the risk of IIFS or issuers selectively pursuing favourable Sharīʻah rulings. Supervisors should require IIFS or issuers to document the process of obtaining Sharīʻah rulings, including disclosure of the rationale behind each ruling.

38.       Supervisors should require the establishment of clear, transparent policies and procedures for the appointment, reappointment and termination of Sharīʻah board members. Supervisors should require IIFS to establish and implement a conflict-of-interest policy applicable to members of the Sharīʻah board and other organs of governance.10 Supervisors should require IIFS to submit to the supervisory authority information on the affiliations, external appointments, and remuneration structure of Sharīʻah board members, to enable effective supervisory assessment of independence and the identification of potential conflicts of interest.

39.       Supervisors should assess the decision-making processes of Sharīʻah board as part of the supervisory review process to ensure that the Sharīʻah board operates with sufficient rigour, independence, and accountability.

40.       Irrespective of the Sharīʻah governance structure adopted in a jurisdiction, supervisors should determine that an IIFS ensures that the key members of its Sharīʻah governance organs fulfil acceptable “fit and proper” criteria, either as determined by the Board of the IIFS and/or in accordance with minimum criteria set out by supervisors (if any).11

41.       Where a Sharīʻah Board is established by IIFS, supervisors should determine that the Sharīʻah
Board have adequate authority and capability to exercise objective and independent12 judgment on

8 See IFSB-10 Appendix 1 Terms of reference for the Sharīʻah Board
9  Typically, organs of Sharīʻah governance include the Sharīʻah Board, Sharīʻah compliance functions, Sharīʻah
risk management, internal Sharīʻah audit, and in some cases, independent external Sharīʻah audit.
10  The policy can include procedures for the declaration of personal or professional interests, requirements for abstention from decision-making where a conflict exists or may reasonably be perceived to exist, and Board oversight mechanisms to ensure compliance.
11 Minimum fit and proper criteria can be referred to in IFSB-10.
12 See IFSB-10 Principles 3.1 and 3.2 for further guidance on independence

12
Sharīʻah-related matters and that the Sharīʻah rulings of the Sharīʻah Board are binding and mandatory on the IIFS. Supervisors should require IIFS to establish and maintain a clear separation of roles, reporting lines and independence among the three lines of defence (i.e. the business line, Sharīʻah compliance and risk management functions and the internal Sharīʻah audit)13.

42.       Supervisors should determine that the Sharīʻah Board or a comparable body is provided with complete, adequate and timely information prior to all meetings and on an ongoing basis on any product, service, process or transaction on which a pronouncement is sought, including having its attention drawn to any areas of possible difficulty identified by the IIFS’s management.

43.       Supervisors should determine the adequacy of the structure and functioning of  Sharīʻah governance organs, along with the effectiveness of the risk management and internal control systems. Supervisors should assess whether there are adequate mechanisms for recording, reporting, addressing, and rectifying incidents of Sharīʻah non-compliance, evaluating the effectiveness and timeliness of these processes.

44.       Supervisors should expect the Sharīʻah compliance function to form part of the IIFS’s internal control system, with responsibility to independently review, monitor, and report on compliance with Sharīʻah rulings and principles as determined by the institution’s Sharīʻah board—and, where applicable, consistent with the pronouncements of a central or national Sharīʻah authority and any applicable regulatory requirements, ensuring that all relevant activities, products, and services conform to the established Sharīʻah governance framework.

45.       Supervisors should determine that IIFS have established an independent and effective internal Sharīʻah audit function, providing assurance on the adequacy and effectiveness of Sharīʻah compliance internal controls and risk management functions. Supervisors should require the internal Sharīʻah audit function to have clear responsibilities, be independent of the audited activities, and have the necessary resources, skills, and authority to operate effectively and objectively. Supervisors should have regular communication with the IIFS’s internal Sharīʻah audit functions to (i) discuss the risk areas identified by both parties, (ii) understand the Sharīʻah non-compliance risk mitigation measures taken by the IIFS, and (iii) understand weaknesses identified and monitor the IIFS’s responses to these weaknesses.

46.       Supervisors should assess whether adequate policies and procedures are in place to maintain the confidentiality of any internal information accessed by a Sharīʻah board or an external review/auditor in the course of their duties.14

47.       Where IIFS is subject to external Sharīʻah audit, supervisors should verify that the appointed auditors are independent of the IIFS being audited, and appropriately qualified. The external Sharīʻah auditor should provide assurance to  the  relevant stakeholders on  the  effectiveness of  Sharīʻah governance. The supervisor should require that the external Sharīʻah auditor report directly to them on
any audit findings that may be of material significance to the functions of the supervisor.








13 The three lines of defence constitute the business line (first line), which executes activities in accordance with Sharīʻah principles set out by the Sharīʻah Board; the internal Sharīʻah compliance and risk management functions (second line) which should operate independently from the business line, and; the internal Sharīʻah audit (third line), which should remain organisationally distinct from the compliance function, providing independent assurance to the Board regarding compliance with Sharīʻah principles. Internal Shariah audit function must not be involved in developing, implementing or operating the risk management function or other first or second line of defence functions related to Shariah governance.
14 See IFSB-10, Principle 4.1 for further guidance

13
2.4.     Risk Management

Principle 4: Supervisors should require IIFS to integrate Sharīʻah principles and guidelines set by the relevant authority15  into their risk management framework to identify, measure, and mitigate Sharīʻah non-compliance risks, with clear escalation procedures for timely corrective actions.

48.       Supervisors should require IIFS to integrate Sharīʻah compliance principles and rulings, as set by the relevant Sharīʻah governance organ, into their broader risk management frameworks to ensure continuous monitoring to manage Sharīʻah non-compliance risks.

49.       Supervisors should determine that the IIFS has established a comprehensive system to identify, assess, and monitor Sharīʻah non-compliance risks and report incidences of non-compliance. This may include, for example, procedural non-compliance, reputational risks and financial implications that arise when addressing non-compliant assets and rectification payments in respect of non-compliant income.

50.       Supervisors should require IIFS to implement clear escalation procedures to address potential or actual breaches to enable timely corrective actions. Supervisors should assess whether IIFS have a structured process for escalating Sharīʻah non-compliance incidents that require immediate decisions or actions to the senior management and, where appropriate, the board as well as to the responsible compliance officers or heads of control functions. Supervisors should expect that IIFS take suitable measures at an early stage to address and mitigate the impact of non-compliance.


2.5.     Disclosure and Transparency

Principle 5: Supervisors should conduct periodic reviews of the adequacy and effectiveness of IIFS and issuers’ Sharīʻah governance disclosures, assessing the comprehensiveness, clarity, and timeliness of information.

51.       Supervisors  should  require  IIFS  and  issuers  of  Sharīʻah-compliant securities  to  provide adequate disclosures on their Sharīʻah governance processes. For IIFS, in particular, this may include disclosures on the structure, systems, processes and controls employed for the purpose of ensuring Sharīʻah compliance in their entire business activities, including any relevant outsourced activities.

52.       Supervisors should require the disclosure of any Sharīʻah non-compliance events that result in financial implications for the IIFS or for investors as well as those events that do not result in financial implications to the IIFS/issuer and their customers/investors (such as procedural lapses in following appropriate Sharīʻah processes). These disclosures should detail the nature of the non-compliance, the financial impact on the institution/issuer and its clients, and the corrective actions taken to rectify the incidence of non-compliance. Supervisors should expect reporting of all Sharīʻah non-compliance events to the supervisory authority irrespective of materiality.

53.       Supervisors should require that Sharīʻah governance-related disclosures by IIFS or issuers be accurate, clear, and easily accessible to relevant stakeholders. These disclosures should be expected to be made available in a timely manner through public platforms such as the IIFS or issuers' website, annual and periodic financial reports, or other appropriate channels. Additionally, any material developments that occur  between regular reporting periods should be expected to  be  promptly
disclosed to both the supervisors and relevant stakeholders.




15 For example, National or Central Shariah Authority (if it exists) or the Shariah Board of the IIFS, and national regulations on Shariah governance.

14
54.       IIFS and issuers should apply the disclosure requirements related to Sharīʻah governance arrangements for the banking sector set out in IFSB-22, for the Takāful sector in IFSB-25, and for the capital markets sector in IFSB-19 and IFSB-21.


2.6.     Islamic Windows

Principle 6: Supervisors should expect the Board to take the overall responsibility for ensuring the establishment and effective operation of a robust Sharīʻah governance framework for Islamic windows.

55.       Supervisors should determine that Sharīʻah governance mechanisms and controls for Islamic windows are integrated fully into the institution's overall governance framework, with clear lines of responsibility and accountability. For the purposes of this standard, Islamic windows refer to both Islamic banking and takāful windows. The requirements set out in Principle 3 on Sharīʻah governance arrangements apply to Islamic windows, taking into consideration proportionality relative to the size, complexity, and risk profile of the window.

56.       Supervisors should expect the Board to establish and maintain an appropriate process to appoint a qualified individual with expertise in Islamic finance as a senior executive managing the Islamic window. The Board should be expected to assess the senior executive's performance in ensuring Sharīʻah compliance and ensure ongoing professional development opportunities to enhance the senior executive's knowledge of evolving Islamic financial practices and regulatory requirements. Supervisors  should  determine  that  the Board  has  clearly  defined  the  senior  executive's  roles, responsibilities, and reporting lines related to Sharīʻah governance processes.

57.       The Board should be expected to ensure the senior executive managing the Islamic window has sufficient authority and resources to implement Sharīʻah governance policies and procedures effectively.


2.7.     Group Structures

Principle 7: In a group structure, supervisors should expect the parent Board to have in place relevant Sharīʻah governance policies and exercise adequate oversight over subsidiaries in a manner appropriate to the structure and risks of the entities and the group.

Parent company

58.       Supervisors should determine that the board of the conventional parent company, in a group structure with Islamic subsidiaries, has adequate mechanisms in place to be informed of any material Sharīʻah non-compliance risks and issues that might affect both the parent entity and its subsidiaries. The  parent  Board  should  be  expected to  exercise  adequate  oversight  over  subsidiaries, while respecting the independent Sharīʻah governance responsibilities of subsidiary Boards. Supervisors may encourage the appointment of at least one board member at the parent level with sufficient knowledge of Islamic finance to help strengthen group-wide oversight, particularly where Islamic financial activities form a significant part of the group’s operations.

59.       Supervisors should  determine that  the  group’s  Sharīʻah governance framework includes appropriate processes and controls to identify and address potential intragroup conflicts of interest, such as those arising from intragroup transactions ensuring that parent or group-level decisions do not
compromise Sharīʻah compliance.





15
60.       Supervisors should determine that the parent company has sufficient resources to monitor the compliance of Islamic subsidiaries with all applicable Sharīʻah governance requirements.

Subsidiaries

61.       Supervisors should require that subsidiary Boards and senior management remain responsible for developing effective Sharīʻah governance and related risk management processes for their entities. While parent IIFS should be expected to establish group-wide Sharīʻah risk policies, subsidiary Boards and senior management should have appropriate input into their local or regional application and the assessment of Sharīʻah risks. Supervisors should determine that parent IIFS provide adequate tools and authority to subsidiaries and clarify the reporting obligations of subsidiaries to the parent company. Subsidiary boards should assess the compatibility of group Sharīʻah policies with local legal and regulatory requirements and amend those policies where necessary.

Consolidated supervision

62.       For groups where all entities are Islamic, supervisors should determine that the parent Board has implemented a comprehensive group-wide Sharīʻah governance framework that ensures reasonable consistency in Sharīʻah compliance across all entities while accommodating sector-specific and jurisdictional requirements.16


2.8.     Outsourced Activities

Principle 8: Supervisors should determine that IIFS and issuers maintain full responsibility for
Sharīʻah compliance even where activities are outsourced.

63.       Supervisors should require that IIFS have robust oversight mechanisms to identify, assess and monitor the Sharīʻah compliance of outsourced functions that present Sharīʻah-compliance implications (e.g. outsourcing of investment activities). IIFS should retain full accountability for outsourced activities and ensure that external service providers adhere to the institution’s Sharīʻah governance framework. Prior to outsourcing, IIFS should conduct thorough due diligence on service providers to ensure their ability to comply with Sharīʻah principles. Supervisors should determine that IIFS implement continuous monitoring and regular Sharīʻah reviews of outsourced activities to ensure ongoing compliance. This may involve periodic reporting and audits from the service provider. Contracts with third-party providers should explicitly define Sharīʻah compliance requirements, roles, and responsibilities to ensure alignment with the IIFS’s governance policies. The IIFS should have a robust risk management framework to identify and mitigate any Sharīʻah non-compliance risks associated with outsourcing arrangements. Supervisors should  require  IIFS  to  establish  and  implement  robust  policies  and processes to identify, prevent, and manage any conflicts of interest arising from outsourcing arrangements. Supervisors should expect IIFS to demonstrate that these mechanisms are effectively in place and ensure that outsourcing does not weaken the overall Sharīʻah governance framework or diminish the institution’s ability to meet its regulatory and Sharīʻah obligations.

64.       In some cases, IIFS or issuers may outsource some Sharīʻah governance functions to external parties. If Sharīʻah advisory functions are outsourced, supervisors should ensure that these services are provided by a firm independent of the one conducting its external Sharīʻah audit to safeguard the independence of the advisory and audit functions. Supervisors should ensure that when any Sharīʻah governance function is outsourced, the external service providers meet appropriate fit and proper
criteria.




16 Also see IFSB-17 CPIFR 12: Consolidated Supervision, https://www.ifsb.org/core-principles/

16
65.       Where any of the Sharīʻah governance functions are outsourced, supervisors may provide guidance on the conditions under which such outsourcing is permissible and set expectations as to which responsibilities of Sharīʻah governance oversight should remain within the IIFS when outsourcing to Sharīʻah advisory firms, thereby ensuring ultimate accountability rests with the IIFS. Supervisors should provide guidance to ensure that any outsourcing arrangements do not compromise the integrity, independence, and effectiveness of the Sharīʻah governance framework as well as its compliance with the jurisdiction’s overall prudential and supervisory framework.


2.9.     Sharīʻah Screening

Principle 9: Supervisors should determine that IIFS implement and maintain adequate policies, processes and controls to ensure ongoing compliance of investments with approved screening criteria.

66.       Supervisors should determine that IIFS have implemented appropriate policies and processes to ensure ongoing Sharīʻah compliance in their investment or other relevant activities. Supervisors should require that the roles and responsibilities related to the Sharīʻah screening process are clearly defined across the relevant Sharīʻah governance organs and are embedded within the institution’s governance, risk management, and internal control framework.

67.       Supervisors should determine if IIFS have appropriate mechanisms, such as screening criteria to evaluate and ensure the compliance of investments and thereafter, periodic review to ensure investments continue to remain Shariah compliant. The Sharīʻah screening criteria can be a set of criteria either endorsed by its own  Sharīʻah board or alternatively an externally produced list of compliant assets or a screening methodology provided by a national or commercial body endorsed by a qualified Sharīʻah authority. Screening methodologies should be subject to periodic review and validation to ensure they remain effective and aligned with evolving market practices and financial products. Supervisors may also expect transparency in the tools, data sources, and processes used in applying the screening methodology.

68.       Supervisors should determine that IIFS maintain transparency in the  Sharīʻah screening process and regularly report the Sharīʻah compliance status of their investments to relevant stakeholders. Supervisors should require IIFS to include in their annual reports a statement from their Sharīʻah advisors detailing the operations of the fund during the year, along with a report from any external Sharīʻah auditor, where applicable.


2.10.   Corrective Actions

Principle 10: Supervisors should determine that IIFS and issuers have established adequate processes for monitoring and addressing Sharīʻah non-compliance, with clear policies and procedures for the rectification of non-compliance.

69.       Supervisors should require IIFS to have adequate processes for monitoring the ongoing
Sharīʻah compliance of their investments, including procedures for divesting from non-compliant assets.

70.       Supervisors should assess whether IIFS have established sufficient processes to detect and manage the risk of Sharīʻah non-compliance arising from changes in the status of assets in their investment portfolio in accordance with the criteria set out in the screening methodology. Supervisors should determine that IIFS have in place clear policies, methodologies and arrangements for the rectification of any Sharīʻah non-compliance. Supervisors should assess whether the IIFS has in place
policies to avoid any potential conflicts of interest in the disbursement of purification payments.



17
2.11.   Issuers of Sharīʻah-compliant Securities

Principle 11: Supervisors should determine that issuers of Sharīʻah-compliant securities have in place appropriate mechanisms for obtaining Sharīʻah approval from a relevant Sharīʻah authority prior to issuance and, where needed, post-issuance, as well as have policies and procedures for corrective actions in the event of a change in compliance status.

71.       Supervisors should determine that issuers of Sharīʻah-compliant securities17 have in place an appropriate mechanism for obtaining rulings from a qualified Sharīʻah authority. Issuers should be expected to transparently disclose the basis for their claims of Sharīʻah compliance.

72.       Supervisors should require issuers to maintain detailed records of the processes undertaken to obtain Sharīʻah approval for securities offered.

73.       Supervisors should assess whether issuers maintain appropriate mechanisms for obtaining ad- hoc Sharīʻah pronouncements after the issuance of the security, particularly in cases where the underlying asset or activity changes or during events such as enforcement or restructuring.

74.       Supervisors should require the issuer to have in place policies and procedures for corrective actions to be taken in the event that a security previously deemed Sharīʻah-compliant is found to be non-compliant.

75.       Supervisors should determine that foreign offering parties have complied with the relevant host jurisdiction's regulations for Sharīʻah governance. Supervisors should have arrangements in place with foreign counterparts to obtain additional information, when necessary, to confirm that appropriate Sharīʻah compliance processes have been followed by foreign entities offering securities in the local market.


2.12.   Comprehensive  Assessment  of  Sharīʻah  Governance  in  IIFS  (Supervisory
Approach)

Principle 12: Supervisors should regularly conduct comprehensive assessments of an IIFS and issuer’s Sharīʻah governance framework and its implementation and determine that the IIFS have robust policies and processes commensurate with its risk profile and systemic importance.

76.       Supervisors, within the scope of their mandate, should have appropriate processes in place to fully evaluate the IIFS’s Sharīʻah governance framework and its implementation through regular assessments and prompt interventions where necessary.

77.       Such assessments may be conducted through regular reviews of policies and other written materials including Sharīʻah review reports and minutes, Sharīʻah audit reports, interviews with Board members, Sharīʻah board members and IIFS personnel, examinations, self-assessments by the IIFS, and other types of on- and off-site monitoring. The evaluations should include regular communication with an IIFS’s board of directors, senior management and organs of governance, including the Sharīʻah board and those responsible for risk, compliance and internal Sharīʻah audit functions, as well as any external Sharīʻah auditors, where relevant. The frequency of interactions may vary according to the size, complexity, structure, economic significance and risk profile of the IIFS. For systemically important
IIFS, interaction should occur more frequently.




17 See Footnote 1

18
78.       The evaluation of Sharīʻah governance effectiveness may include a review of any assessments of the Board, senior management and the Sharīʻah board, and other information typically used by IIFS, as well as supervisory interviews, observations and qualitative judgments. In arriving at such judgments, supervisors need to be particularly mindful of the consistency of treatment across the IIFS they supervise. Supervisory staff should have the necessary skills to evaluate these issues and arrive at the complex judgments involved in assessing Sharīʻah governance effectiveness.

79.       Supervisors should have access to the Sharīʻah Board and relevant staff and records in order to monitor compliance with relevant laws and regulations and internal compliance with the pronouncements/resolutions of the Sharīʻah Board. This includes access to both internal and any independent external Sharīʻah audit reports and to any assessments of the performance of the Sharīʻah Board. Where deemed necessary in exercising supervisory judgment, supervisors may consult a national or central Sharīʻah authority if one is present—or another competent Sharīʻah body recognised within the jurisdiction.

80.       Supervisors should assess whether the Sharīʻah governance framework of an IIFS continues to remain appropriate in light of material changes to the IIFS's size, complexity, structure, economic significance and risk profile, especially in cases where proportionality is applied.

81.       Where pronouncements of a national or central Sharīʻah authority are binding, supervisors should, through the supervisory process, ensure that institutional rulings and practices are aligned with those rulings. This may include conducting periodic reviews, requiring institutions to demonstrate compliance, and establishing escalation procedures to resolve material inconsistencies. To minimise differences or ambiguities in interpretation, supervisors should ensure that such pronouncements are communicated clearly, along with their underlying rationale. Where ambiguity arises, a formal escalation or clarification mechanism—such as referral to the issuing authority—may be established.

82.       To promote consistency and greater alignment of  Sharīʻah governance practices across institutions, supervisors may establish mechanisms such as encouraging transparent documentation of Shariah pronouncements and their underlying rationale, facilitating dialogue and exchange among institutional Sharīʻah boards, and promoting regular engagement with the supervisory authority.



2.13.   Requiring Improvement and Remedial Action by the IIFS

Principle 13: Supervisors should require IIFS and issuers to correct deficiencies in a timely manner.

83.       When deficiencies in Sharīʻah governance are identified, supervisors should exercise their authority to require prompt remedial actions from IIFS. This may include improvements to Sharīʻah governance structures, processes, or personnel, and more stringent or accelerated measures for persistent or severe failures.

84.       Supervisors  should  have  a  range  of  tools  available  to  address  Sharīʻah  governance improvement needs and any Sharīʻah governance failures of IIFS. They should be able to require IIFS to take steps towards improvement and remedial action and ensure accountability for the Sharīʻah governance. These tools may include the ability to compel changes in the IIFS’s policies and Sharīʻah governance practices or other corrective actions. They should include, where necessary, the authority to impose sanctions or other punitive measures. The choice of tool and the time frame for any remedial action should be proportionate to the level of risk the Sharīʻah governance deficiency poses to the safety
and soundness of the IIFS or the financial system.




19
85.        When a supervisor requires an IIFS to take remedial action, they should set a timetable for completion. Supervisors should have escalation procedures in place to require more stringent or accelerated remedial action if an IIFS does not adequately address the deficiencies identified or the supervisor deems that further action is warranted.

86.       For issuers of Sharīʻah-compliant securities, supervisors should ensure that any deficiencies in Sharīʻah  governance arrangements related  to  the  issuance―such as  inadequate or  misleading Sharīʻah-related disclosures—are promptly rectified. Supervisory measures may include requiring enhanced or corrective disclosures, clarifying the basis for Sharīʻah compliance claims, and, where necessary, imposing restrictions on future issuances or requiring reclassification of the instrument’s Sharīʻah-compliance status, subject to the applicable legal and regulatory framework.


2.14.   Supervisory Resources and Capacity

Principle 14: Supervisors should ensure that they have adequate resources and capacity to effectively assess IIFS and issuer’s Sharīʻah Governance and related risks.

87.       Effective  oversight  of  Sharīʻah  governance  requires  supervisors  to  maintain  adequate resources and appropriately skilled staff.

88.       Supervisors should periodically assess existing skills and projected requirements, taking into account relevant evolving market practices and supervisory practices and take timely measures to build adequate expertise. Supervisors should invest in continuous capacity building for the relevant staff responsible for the oversight of Sharīʻah governance.

89.       Supervisors should stay informed about evolving Sharīʻah governance practices and emerging challenges in the industry by engaging a broad and diverse range of stakeholders, as well as adapting supervisory approaches accordingly.

90.       Supervisors may enhance their technological capabilities, including the use of supervisory technology (SupTech), to support Sharīʻah governance oversight. In deploying technologies, supervisors should ensure its overall effectiveness, the presence of robust data security and cybersecurity protocols to safeguard confidential information and build the capacity of supervisory staff to utilise these tools effectively.


2.15.   Cooperation and Information-Sharing among Relevant Authorities

Principle 15: Supervisors should establish and maintain mechanisms for cooperation and information sharing with other relevant domestic and foreign supervisory authorities to facilitate comprehensive oversight of Sharīʻah governance practices.

91.       Cooperation and appropriate information-sharing among relevant supervisors can significantly contribute to the effectiveness of these authorities in the supervision of Sharīʻah governance. Such information-sharing is particularly important between home and host supervisors of cross-border IIFS.

92.       Effective coordination and cooperation mechanisms should be established among national supervisory and conduct authorities to ensure consistency of Sharīʻah governance supervision in the domestic context.

93.       In jurisdictions that have more than one central Sharīʻah authority for different financial sectors, formal cooperation mechanisms among these bodies should be facilitated and encouraged. The rulings




20
of different central Sharīʻah authorities should be communicated transparently to market participants and the public, ensuring clarity and consistency in Sharīʻah rulings.

94.       Supervisors are encouraged to establish formal cooperation arrangements with counterparts18 in other jurisdictions as this would facilitate information sharing and coordinate oversight of cross-border Islamic financial activities.

95.       Cooperation can occur on a bilateral basis, in the form of a supervisory college or through periodic meetings among supervisors at which Sharīʻah governance matters are discussed.   Such communication can help supervisors improve their assessment of the overall Sharīʻah governance of an IIFS and the risks it faces, particularly in a group context, and help other authorities assess the risks posed to the broader financial system. The information shared should be relevant for supervisory purposes and be provided within the constraints of confidentiality and other applicable laws. Special arrangements, such as a memorandum of understanding, may be warranted to govern the sharing of
information among supervisors or between supervisors and other authorities.
















































18 Depending on the jurisdictional approach, counterparts may include regulatory authorities and, where applicable, central or national Sharīʻah authorities.

21
DEFINITIONS


The following definitions are intended to assist readers in their understanding of the terms used in this
Standard. The list of definitions provided is by no means exhaustive.



Institutions offering Islamic financial services (IIFS)
Institutions offering Islamic financial services include Islamic banks, Islamic insurance institutions, Islamic windows and other non-bank Islamic financial institutions (e.g. fund management companies).


Sharīʻah                        The practical divine law deduced from its legitimate sources: the Qur'ān, Sunnah, Consensus (ijmā‘), Analogy (qiyās) and other approved sources of the Sharīʻah.


Sharīʻah board             An independent body set up or engaged by the institution offering Islamic financial services to supervise its Sharīʻah compliance and governance system.


Sharīʻah non- compliance risk
An operational risk resulting from non-compliance of the institution with the rules and principles of Sharīʻah in its products and services.



Islamic Window           That part of a conventional financial institution (which may be a branch or dedicated unit of that institution) that provides financial services that are Sharīʻah-compliant.


Parent Company          A  financial  institution,  financial  holding  company  or  other  company considered by the supervisors to be the parent of a financial group under applicable national law as determined to be appropriate by the entity’s national supervisor.






























22
COUNCIL

Chairman

H.E. Abdellatif Jouahri– Bank Al-Maghrib

Deputy Chairman

H.E. Dr. Perry Warjiyo, Bank Indonesia

Members*



H.E. Dr. Muhammad Sulaiman                      Islamic Development Bank



H. E. Dr. Ahsan H. Mansur                            Bangladesh Bank



H.E. Khalid Ebrahim Humaidan                     Central Bank of Bahrain



H.E. Rashidah Sabtu                                     Brunei Darussalam Central Bank



H.E. M. Ahmed Osman Ali                             Banque Centrale de Djibouti



H.E. Hassan Abdalla                                      Central Bank of Egypt



H.E. Dr. Mohammad-Reza Farzin                 Central Bank of Islamic Republic of Iran



H.E. Dr. Ali Mohsen Ismail                             Central Bank of Iraq



H.E. Dr. Adel Alsharkas                                 Central Bank of Jordan



H.E. Basel Ahmad Al-Haroon                        Central Bank of Kuwait



H.E. Naji Mohammed Issa Belqasim             Central Bank of Libya



H.E. Datuk Shaik Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour   Bank Negara Malaysia



H.E. Sir Mohamed Lemine Dhehby               Central Bank of Mauritania



H.E. Dr. Rama Krishna Sithanen G.C.S.K     Bank of Mauritius




23

H.E. Dr. Olayemi Michael Cardoso                Central Bank of Nigeria



H.E. Ahmed Al Musalmi                                 Central Bank of Oman



H.E. JAMEEL AHMAD                                   State Bank of Pakistan


H.E.  Sheikh  Bandar  Bin  Mohammed Bin Qatar Central Bank
Saoud Al-Thani


H.E. Ayman Alsayari                                      Saudi Central Bank



H.E. Buraie Siddig Ali Ahmed                        Central Bank of Sudan



H.E. Prof. Dr. Şahap Kavcioğlu                     Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency, Türkiye


H.E. Khaled Mohamed Balama Al Tameemi Central Bank of United Arab Emirates

* In alphabetical order of the country the member’s organisation represents, except international
organisations, which are listed first.






































24







TECHNICAL COMMITTEE

Chairman

Mr. Saud Al Busaidi – Central Bank of Oman (since August 2024)

Deputy Chairman

Mr. Mohamed Abou Moussa, Central Bank of Egypt (since August 2024)

Members*



Mr. Syed Faiq Najeeb                                    Islamic Development Bank



Mr. Shahriar Siddiqui                                     Bangladesh Bank



Mrs. Shireen Abdulkarim Al Sayed                Central Bank of Bahrain



Dr. Mariawati Omar                                        Brunei Darussalam Central Bank



Dr. Rifki Ismal                                                Bank Indonesia



Mrs. Nyimas Rohmah                                    Otoritas Jasa Keuangan, Indonesia



Mr. Mustafa Abd Nazzal                               Central Bank of Iraq



Dr. Mohammad Bader Al Khamees               Central Bank of Kuwait



Dr. Ali Abusalah Elmabrok Amreeghah         Central Bank of Libya



Mr. Nik Faris Nik Sallahuddin                        Bank Negara Malaysia



Mrs. Sharifatul Hanizah Bin Said Ali              Securities Commission Malaysia



Dr. Mohammed Zougari Laghrari                  Bank Al-Maghrib




25

Dr. Abdurrahman Abdullahi                          Central Bank of Nigeria



Mr. Ahmad Usman Kollere                           National Insurance Commission (NAICOM), Nigeria



Ms. Nighat Tanveer                                       State Bank of Pakistan



Mr. Hisham Saleh Al-Mannai                         Qatar Central Bank



Mr. Walid Alzahrani                                       Saudi Central Bank



Dr. Muhammed Habib DOLGUN                  Central Bank of the Republic of Türkiye



Dr. İlker KOÇ's                                               Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency, Türkiye


Mr. Abdulaziz Saoud Al Mualla                      Central Bank of United Arab Emirates

* In alphabetical order of the country the member’s organisation represents, except international
organisations, which are listed first.






































26
WORKING GROUP FOR THE GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR EFFECTIVE SUPERVISION

OF SHARĪʻAH GOVERNANCE


Chairman


Mr. Abdulaziz Saoud Almualla – Central Bank of the United Arab Emirates


Members*


Mr. Aboubcar Kante                               Islamic Development Bank


Mr. Khawla Ebrahim                              Central Bank of Bahrain


Mr. Md. Rabiul Karim                             Bangladesh Bank


Dr. Ali Sakti                                            Bank Indonesia


Mr. Helmy Iqbal                                      Otoritas Jasa Keuangan (OJK)


Mr. Hussein Ridha Mahdi                      Central Bank of Iraq


Dr. Abdulrahman Al Qassar                   Central Bank of Kuwait


Mr. Waleed AlOwaiyesh                        Capital Markets Authority - Kuwait


Mr. Ali H. Charif                                     Banque Du Liban


Ms. Diyana Izzati Ridza Saifuddin         Bank Negara Malaysia


Mr. Mohd Hariz Daud                             Securities Commission Malaysia


Mr. Mohamad Hud bin Saleh Huddin    Malaysia Deposit Insurance Corporation


Ms. Loubna Kouar                                 Bank Al-Maghrib


Mr. Musa Abdullahi                                Central Bank of Nigeria


Mr. Zubairu Sulaiman Darazo                National Insurance Commission, Nigeria


Mr. Sulaiman Al Harthy                          Central Bank of Oman


Mr. Tariq Naseem                                  Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan


Ms. Atty. Arifa A. Ala                              Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas


Mr. Ahmed Bin Mohammed Asery         Saudi Central Bank



27
Mr. Azizov Ayyomuddin                         National Bank of Tajikistan


Ms. Sara Eliufoo Shoo                           Bank of Tanzania


Ms. Emine Nur Öztürk Alkan                 IPRSA, Türkiye


Dr. Saad Bakkali                                    Central Bank of the United Arab Emirates

* In alphabetical order of the country the member’s organisation represents, except international
organisations, which are listed first.



THE SHARĪʻAH BOARD


Chairman


Dr. Mohamed Ali Ibrahim Elgari


Deputy Chairman


Dr. Nizam Muhammad Saleh Yaquby


Members


Dr. Aznan Hasan                                                Member


Mufti Muhammad Hassan Kalim                         Member


Dr. Sa’id Adekunle Mikail                                    Member






SECRETARIAT, ISLAMIC FINANCIAL SERVICES BOARD



Dr. Ghiath Shabsigh                                         Secretary-General

Mrs. Aminath Amany Ahmed                            Acting     Assistant     Secretary-General,    Standard
Development and Research

Mr. Erfanul Alam Siddiquee (until Mar 2025)   Member of the Secretariat, Standard Development and Research

Dr. Bashir Aliyu Umar                                       Consultant








28
