Shari'ah Standard No.  (7)



Hawalah












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        176
1,   Scope of the Standard ............so.sos«sos.so.sso.so.ss.sos.sos.so........       176
2.  Definition of Hawalah..............................................................................        176
3.  PermissibilityofHawalah ............o....o...o..oo.so.»..s.so.so.so..................       176
4.  Form of  a Hawalah  Contract  ......so . o oososoooosooooooooro so sooooo ooooo oo» .        176
5.  Types of Hawalah and the Applicable Rulings ............coo....    177
6.  Conditions of  Hawalah ..... .,.....,.................................................................        178
7.  Effect  af Hawalah on the Relationship between the Transferor and
the Transfi ~r ~e............................................................................................        178
8.  Effect  of Hawalah on the Relationship between the Transferor and
the Payer                                                                                                   179
9.  Effed  of Hawalah on the Relationship  between the Transferee and
t heyer........ .. .. .. .. ... .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. .. .. .. . .. ... .. .... .. ... . .. .. . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. ... ... ... .. . .. .. . ..            I 79
IO.  Etfoct of Death and Bankruptcy on a Hawalah Transaction...............        179
11.  Termination of a Hawalah Liability........................................................        180
12.  Modern Applications ofHawalah Rules................................................        180
13.  Date of Issuance of the Standard.............................................................        183
Adoption  of the Standard......................................................................        184
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard.............         185
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard.....................................        187
Appendix (c):   Definitions..............................................................................        193










173








IN  THE NAME OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all  the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all  his companions





Preface


The aim of this standard is  to explain the rulings,  types,  requirements and limitations  of transfors  (transfer cf debts and transfor of rights),  what is  permissible or prohibited in this regard, and the applications of transfers in Islamic fi nancdal Institutions  (Institution/Institutions).































(1) The  word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer,  in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



175





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (7)  Hawalah





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard  covers Hawalah transactions that involve a change of debtor, i.e.  transfer  of debt.  The scope  of this  standard  does  not  cover  banking remittances except the remittances that take the form ofHawalah  (transfer of debt).

2. Definition ofHawalah

Hawalah of debt is  the transfer of debt from the transferor  (Muheel) to the payer (Muhal Alaihi). 'The transf zr of right, on the other hand, is a replacement of a creditor with  another creditor.  The transfer of debt differ from transf zr of right  in that in transf zr  of debt a debtor  is  replaced by another  debtor, whereas in a transf r of right a creditor is  replaced by another creditor.
3.  Permissibility of Hawalah

3/1  Hawalah  is  a legitimate and  an independent contract made  out of courtesy and  is  not  a  contract of sale.  It is  permitted in order  to facilitate  payments and  recovery.

3/2  The acceptance  ofHawalah is  recommended for the transf zree if the potential  payer  is  known  to be solvent  and  a person  who honours payments.  This  is  because  Hawalah  benefits the  creditor and  gives relief to  the  debtor.  If the  financial  status  and  creditworthiness  of the  potential  payer  are unknown,  then  Hawalah  becomes  Mubah (permissible).

4. Form of a Hawalah Contract

4/1   A contract of Hawalah can be concluded by an offer from the transferor and acceptance from the transferee (Muhal) and the payer in a manner that clearly indicates the intention of the parties to conclude a Hawalah contract  and  the  transfer  of the  liability or obligation  in respect  of



176





Sharf 'ah  Stan dar d No.  (7)  Hawalh

a debt from one party to another party. It is not necessary that the word transfer be used.

4/2  Hawalah is a binding  contract.  Therefore, it is not subject to unilateral termination.

4/3  It is  a requirement that  a  transfer of debt  take  effoct immediately;, not  to be suspended for  a period  of time  and  not  to be concluded on a temporary basis or contingent on future  events. However, it is permissible to defer payment  of the transferred  debt until  a future specified  date.

5. Types ofHawalah  and the Applicable Rulings

5/1  Hawalah is divided into restricted  and unrestricted  Hawalah.

5/1/1  Restricted Hawalah is permissible.  It is a transaction  where the payer is restricted to settling the amount  of the transforred  debt from the amount  of  a financial  or tangible asset that belongs to the transferor and is in the possession  of the payer.

5/1/2  Unrestricted  Hawalah  is  permissible.  It is  a  kind  of transfer of debt in which  the transf ror  is  not  a creditor  to the  payer and the payer undertakes to pay the amount of the debt owed by,  the  transferor  from  his  own  funds  and  to  have recourse afterwards  to the transf ror for settlement, provided that  the transfer for payment  was made on the order  of the transf zror.

5/1/3  I is permitted  to conclude  a Hawalah on a spot payment  basis.
This  is  a Hawalah  in which  the debt  transf 2rred  to the payer becomes  payable  on  the  spot,  whether   the debt  has already fallen due and the obligation  is then transf 2rred to the payer for immediate  settlement, or the transferred  debt is yet to fall  due and  the  transferee  has required,  as  a  condition   for accepting the transfer,  that it be paid immediately by virtue of  transfer.

5/1/4 It is  permissible  to conclude  a Hawalah contract on a deferred payment  basis. This is  a Hawalah in which the debt transferred to the payer is  to be paid in  the future, whether  the payment  of the debt is not yet due and was transferred as such to the payer,



177





Shar f'ah  Stan dard No.  (7)  Hawalh

or the payment  of such debt is  due but the payer required  that it should  be transferred for future  payment  at an agreed  date. In the latter case, the payer cannot  be asked for payment  before the agreed date.

6. Conditions of Hawalah

6/1  The  permissibility  of Hawalah  requires  the  consent  of all parties, namely the transferor,  the transferee  and the payer.
6/2  The permissibility  of a Hawalah requires that the transferor  be a debt• or to the transferee. A transaction in which a non-debtor transfers an• other is an agency contract  for collection of the debt and not a transfer of debt.
6/3  It is  not  a condition in a Hawalah  that the payer be a debtor  to the transferor.  If the payer is not a debtor  to the transferor,  the Hawalah will be an unrestricted Hawalah.  [see item 5/1/2]

6/4  It is a condition that  all Hawalah  parties be legally competent to act independently.
6/5   It  is  a condition  in Hawalah  that  both  the transf rred  debt  and the
debt to be used for settlement  be known and transferable.

6/6  It is a condition for concluding  restricted Hawalah that the transferred debt or the transfrred portion of the debt be equal to the debt owed to the transf zree in terms of kind, type, quality and amount. However, the transferor may transfer a lesser amount  of  a debt owed to the transferee to be settled from a larger amount  owed by the transferor on condition that  the transferee  be entitled  only to the  equivalent  amount  of his debt.

7. Effect of Hawalah  on the Relationship between the Transferor and the
Transf 2ree

7/1   A valid Hawalah discharges the transferor  from both the debt liability and any claims in respect of it.  In other words, the transferee will have no right  of  recourse  against the transferor  for payment.  However,  if



178





Sh arf'ah  Stan dard No.  (7)  Hawalh

the acceptance  of the transfer  was based  on the condition  that  the payer must be solvent,  then the transferee will have a right of recourse if the payer is  not solvent.

7/2 'The  transferee   is  entitled  to  have  a right  of recourse  against  the transferor in situations  of (I)  death  of the payer in bankruptcy,  (II) liquidation of an  Institution  that is the payer in the case of bankruptcy before  payment  of the  debt,   (III)   the  payer  is  declared  bankrupt in  his lifetime,  or he denies  concluding  the  Hawalah  contract and has taken  a judicial  oath  to this  effect  and there  is  no evidence  to prove otherwise  and (IV) the Institution  that is  the payer is declared bankrupt  by a court order.

8. Effect of Hawalah  on the Relationship between  the Transf ror and the
Payer

After the conclusion  of a restricted  Hawalah, the transf zror is  no longer entitled  to reclaim from the payer an amount  transforred to the payer in respect of the debt to be settled,  because the right  to receive this amount has now passed to the transf zree.
9. Effect of Hawalah  on the Relationship between  the Transferee and the
Payer

9/1  The transferee  is entitled to claim the amount  of the debt assigned to him through  Hawalah from the payer in accordance  with conditions of Hawalah  contract.  The payer, on the other hand,  is  obliged to pay him and has no right to refuse payment.
9/2 The payer takes the place of the transferor in respect to all rights,  legal protections and obligations. The transf zree in restricted Hawalah takes the place ofi the transferor in respect to all rights, legal protections and obligations against the payer.

10.   Effect of Death  and Bankruptcy  on a Hawalah  Transaction

10/I   A Hawalah shall  not be annulled  by the death of the transferor  or liquidation  of a transferor  Institution. The transferee  is  the sole owner ofi the amount  of the debt payable by the payer and,  after



179





Shar f'ah  Stan dar d No.  (7)  Hawalh

a Hawalah  transaction,  such  a debt  cannot  be  included  in the assets of the transferor that are available to be distributed,  after death or liquidation,  among creditors  on a pro rata basis.

10/2   A Hawalah transaction  shall not be annulled  due to the death of the payer or the liquidation of the Institution  acting as payer. In these cases,  the transf zree  will have the right of recourse  against the estate of the payer for  recovery,  a personal  guarantor,  if any, or  pre-distribution  assets  of the  liquidation.   However,  if the payer dies in the state of bankruptcy,  then the transferee  shall be entitled to have recourse  to the transf eror.  [see  item  7/2]

10/3   A Hawalah  transaction   shall  not  be  annulled  due to  the  death of the  transferee  and the  heirs shall  replace the transferee.  The Hawalah will also not be void  in case of liquidation  of a transferee Institution   in  which  case the  liquidator  takes  the  place  of the Institution  for settlement.

11.  Termination of a Hawalah  Liability

A Hawalah liability will come to an end  by settlement  of the debt or by a mutual  agreement  to terminate  it  or by the debt being written-off  by the transferee.

12.  Modern  Applications  of Hawalah Rules

12/1  Withdrawals from  a current account

An  issuance  of a  cheque  against  a current  account  is  a form  of Hawalah if the beneficiary  is a creditor of the issuer  or the account holder  for the  amount  of the  cheque,  in which  case the  issuer, the  bank  and  the  beneficiary  are  the  transferor,  the  payer  and the  transferee  respectively.  If the  beneficiary  is not  a  creditor to the  issuer  of the  cheque,  then  this is  not  a Hawalah  transaction because there can be  no Hawalah transaction  without  an existing debt. In the absence of a debt, the transaction  becomes an agency contract  for  recovery of the amount  of the debt on behalf of the
transferor, which is  permissible  by Shari'ah.



180





Sh arf'ah  Stan dard No.  (7)  Hawalh

12/2   Overdrawing  from an account or overdraft

If the beneficiary  of the amount  of a cheque  is  a creditor  to the issuer,  then  issuing  a cheque  against  the  account  of the  issuer without   a balance  is  unrestricted  transfer  of debt  if the  bank accepts the overdraft.  If the bank rejects the overdraft,  then  this is not  considered a transfer  of debt,  in which  case the potential beneficiary  may have recourse  to the issuer.

12/3   Travellers cheques

The holder of a travellers' cheque, the value of which has been paid by him to the issuing Institution, is a creditor to such an Institution. Ifthe holder ct the travellers' cheque endorses the cheque in favour of his creditor,  it becomes  a transfer of debt  in favour  of a third party  against the issuing  Institution  that  is  a debtor to the holder of the traveller's  cheque.  This  is  a restricted  transfer  of debt and the amount  of the debt  is  the value of  the  cheque  for  which  the Institution  received payment.

12/4   Bills of  exchange

12/4/1  A bill of exchange is a form of Hawalah  if the beneficiary is
a creditor  to the  drawer.  The  drawer  is,  in  this  case, the transf ror  who  gives orders  for  the  paying  bank  to pay a certain  sum of money  at a specified  date to the defi ned
beneficiary.  The party executing payment  cl such amount
of money  is  the  payer  whereas   the  beneficiary,  i.e.  the holder  of the  bill,  is  the  transferee.  If the  beneficiary   is not  a creditor  of the  drawer,  then  the issuance  of the bill of exchange  becomes   an  agency  contract   to  recover  or collect the amount  of the bill of exchange  on behalf of the drawer.
12/4/2   In the absence  cl a debt  obligation  between   the drawer and  the paying  bank,  the issuance  of a bill cl exchange becomes  an unrestricted Hawalah.



181





Sharf 'ah  Stan dard No.  (7)  Hawalh

12/5  Endorsement of a negotiable instrument

12/5/1  An endorsement of a negotiable instrument in a manner that  transfers title to its value to the beneficiary is a form ofHawalah if the beneficiary is a creditor to the endorser. If the beneficiary is not a creditor to the endorser, the en• dorsement becomes one of agency  contract for collection of the amount of the  debt.

12/5/2   An endorsement of a bill of exchange on behalf of a client who  requires the Institution to transfer,  after  collection, the  amount  of the   instrument  into  his  account  is  not a Hawalah. This is  a contract of agency  that  is permissible with or without consideration.

12/5/3   Subject to item  12/5/1, it is permissible for the first beneficiary from a bill of exchange to endorse  it in favour of  any other party.  The second  beneficiary  may also endorse  such a bill of exchange  in favour of a third  party  and so on,  in which case the  revolving of  endorsements is  a form  of  successive Hawalah which is  not objectionable  in Shari'ah.
12/5/4   I is not permissible to discount bills of exchange  by trans• ferring the ownership of their value, before their  due date, to an Institution or others for a discounted immediate payment. This is  because  the transaction  in this manner is a form f Riba.
12/6  Transfer of money (remittances)

The request  of a customer for the  Institution to transfer a certain amount of money  in the same currency from his current account to a particular beneficiary is  a transfer of debt  if the  applicant is a debtor  to such  a beneficiary.   The  fee that  the  Institution gains from   this  transaction  is   consideration  for  the  delivery   of  the money  and it is not an additional amount gained  by the Institution over the  amount transferred.  However,  if a remittance is  to take place in a currency different  from that  presented by the applicant



182





Sharf 'ah  Stan dar d No.  (7)  Hawalh

for the transfer, then the transaction  consists of a combination  of currency  exchange and a transfer  of money  that  is  permissible. [see  item  2/11  of the Sharf'ah  Standard  on Trading in Currencies]

13.   Date of Issuance  ct the Standard

This standard  was issued  on Rabi' I,  1423  A.H.,  corresponding to 16 May
2002A.D.















































183





Sharf 'ah  Standard  No. (7):  Hawalah





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'.ah  Standard  on Hawalah was adopted  by the Shari'ah  Board  in its meeting No (8) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah on 28 Safar- 4 Rabil' I,  1423  A.H., corresponding to 11-16  May 2002 A.D.













































184





Sharf 'ah  Standard  No. (7)  Hawalah





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (5) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 8-12  Ramadan
1421  A.H.,  corresponding  to 4-8 December  2000 A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Board decided to give priority to the preparation of a Shari'ah Standard on Hawalah.

On 29 Ramadan  1421  A.H., corresponding to 25 December  2000 A.D., a Shari'ah  consultant  was commissioned  to  prepare  a juristic study  and an exposure  draft.
In its  meeting  held in Bahrain on 15-16  Safar  1422  A.H.,  corresponding to  9-10  May  2001   A.D.,   the  Shari'ah  Studies  Committee   discussed  the juristic study and made certain amendments to it. The committee also discussed the exposure draft of the Standard  in its  meeting No.  (10)  held in Bahrain  on 14  Rabi' I,   1422  A.H.,  corresponding to 6 June  2001  A.D.,  and asked the consultant  to make some amendments in light of the comments made by the members.

In its meeting  No.  (11) held in Jordan on  17 Jumada II,  1422 A.H., cor• responding  to 5 September  2001  A.D., the Shari'ah  Studies Committee  dis• cussed the exposure  draft and made some relevant amendments.

The revised exposure draft cf the standard  was presented  to the Shari'ah
Board  in  its meeting  No.  (7) held  in Makkah  Al-Mukarramah  on 9-13
Ramadan   1422  A.H., corresponding to 24-28 November  2001  A.D. The Shari'ah  Board  made  further amendments  to  the  exposure  draft of the standard  and  decided   that  it   should   be  distributed  to  specialists   and interested  parties  in order  to obtain  their  comments  in order  to discuss them in  a public hearing.
A public hearing was held in Bahrain  on 29-20 Dhul-Hajjah  1422 A.H., corresponding  to 2-3 February  2002.  The public hearing  was  attended  by



185





Sharf 'ah  Stan dar d No.  (7)  Hawalh

more than 30 participants representing central Institutions, Institutions, accounting firms,  Shari'ah  scholars,  academics and others  who are interested in this  field.  The members  responded  to  the written  comments  that were sent  prior  to the  public hearing  as well as to the  oral comments  that were expressed  in the  public hearing.

The Shari'ah Standards  Committee  in its meeting  held on 21-22 Dhul• Hajjah 1422  A.H., corresponding to 6-7 March  2002 A.D., in  the Kingdom of Bahrain  discussed  the  comments  made  about  the  exposure  draft.  The Committee  made  the necessary  amendments,  which  it deemed  necessary in light of both the discussions  that took place in the public hearing,  and the  written comments  that were received.
The Shari'ah  Board  in  its  meeting  No.  (8)  held  on  28 Safar  - 4 Rabi' I,   1423  A.H.,  corresponding to 11-16  May 2002  A.D,,  in Al-Madinah  Al• Munawwarah  discussed  the amendments made  by the Shari'ah  Standards Committee,   and   made   the   necessary   amendments,   which   it   deemed necessary. Some paragraphs  of the standard were adopted by the unanimous vote of the members  of the Sharf'ah  Board,  while the other paragraphs were adopted  by the majority  vote of the members,  as recorded  in the minutes of the Shari'ah  Board.

The Shari'ah Standards  Review Committee  reviewed the standard  in its meeting  held in Rab  II,  1433  A.H.,  corresponding to March  2012  A.D,, in the State  of Qatar,  and proposed  after deliberation  a set of amendments (additions,   deletions,  and  rephrasing)   as  deemed   necessary,  and  then submitted  the  proposed  amendments to the  Shari'ah  Board  for approval as it deemed  necessary.
In its  meeting  No.  (39)   held in the Kingdom  of Bahrain  on  13-15  Mu• harram  1435  A.H., corresponding to 6-8 November  2014  A.D., the Shari'ah Board  discussed   the  proposed   amendments  submitted   by  the Shari'ah Standards  Review Committee.  After deliberation,  the Shari'ah  Board  ap•
proved  necessary  amendments,  and  the standard  was adopted  in  its  cur•
rent  amended  version.







186





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (7)  Hawalah





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Permissibility  ofHawalah

The contract ofHawalah  derives its permissibility  from the Qur'an, the Sunnah,  Ijma'  (consensus  ofFuqaha)  and reasoning.  Abu Hurayrah  (may Allah be  pleased with him)  narrated that the Prophet (peace be upon him) said:  "Default on payment by a solvent debtor is unjust,   and ifanyone  of you
is  transferred  to  a solvent person,  he  must accept  the  transfer."  In another
text ct the Hadith,  related  by Ahmad  and AI-Bayhaqi,  the Prophet  (peace be upon  him)  said:   If one   is  referred  to  a solvent person for  the  recovery of his  right,  such  a person   must accept  the  transfer".   The Prophet's  order that  the creditor  must accept the transfer  means  transfer  of debt  is  legal, otherwise he would not give that order.

The permissibility  of Hawalah has enjoyed unanimity  in Muslim soci• eties and communities  from time immemorial and there is  no report  that anyone has disapproved  of it.63

The acceptance of a Hawalah contract is recommended  for the transferee if the  potential  payer is   known  to  be solvent  and  keeps his  promises   in respect to payments  because it  benefits the creditor and gives  relief to the debtor from  liability   by the transfer.
The basis that a Hawalah transaction  is  also Mubah (permissible)  for the transferee  if the financial status  and creditworthiness  af  the potential payer are unknown is that the order in the above-mentioned  Hadith does not make
it  a condition that the payer be solvent for the permissibility of Hawalah.  If

(2)  "Sahih Al-Bukhari"  [3:  123];  and "Sahih Muslim"  [3:  119].
(3)  Ibn   Qudamah,   4-Maughn"  [4:   336]; Al-Buhuti,   "Kashshaf Al-Qina"  [3:  382];  Al• Buhuti,  "Sharh Muntaha  Al-Hradat" [2:  134];  bn Nujaym,  Al-Bahr A1-ra'iq" [6:  269];
and AI-Zayla'i,  "Tabyin Al-Ha4a 'i4" [4  171].



187





Sh arf'ah  Stan dard No.  (7)  Hawalh

the payer is not sol vent then the acceptance ct the  Hawalah by the transferee remains permissible.

A Hawalah  Contract is Binding

If all its conditions are met, a Hawalah contract becomes binding without any difference of opinion among the scholars.

Form of a Hawalah  Contract

The contract of Hawalah  cannot  be concluded  on  a deferred  basis or subject  to the  happening  of a particular event,  as it  has the character  of a contract  of  (immediate)  exchange.  This  is because  by  virtue  of the Hawalah contract both the transferee (the payee) and the payer have immediately entered  into a new contractual relationship. Also, a Hawalah cannot  be concluded  on  a  temporary  basis nor  can  it be contingent  on future  events,  because this conflicts with the nature  of Hawalah which  is the immediate  transfer  of the debt to the payer!
Types and Rulings of a Hawalah  Contract
The scholars have unanimously endorsed the permissibility of restricted Hawalah,  whether  it  is  restricted  to  a  debt owed to the  transferor  by the payer or it is  restricted  to the value  of a tangible  good belonging to the transferor in the possession of the payer.  The unrestricted  Hawalah
is  permitted  by the Hanafis only.  They based this  permissibility on the
Prophet's order that a Hawalah deal must be accepted, without indicating that the payer must  be a debtor to the transferor  or not. This  shows  the permissibility of both the unrestricted  and restricted Hawalah.
The basis  for the permissibility  of a def erred  Hawalah contract  is  that
the payer is liable  to make payment to the payee (transferee) by virtue of Hawalah.  This permissibility  is  analogous to the permissibility of a  de• frred  guarantee contract. As a matter of principle,  a right  that  is due by virtue of Hawalah is similar  to a right that is  due by virtue of a guarantee

(4)  Ibn  Abidin,  "Radd  Al-Muhtar"   [5:  349];   "Durar  Al-Hukkam   F  Sharh  Majallat  Al•
Ahkam" [2:  52]; and "AI-Mawsih Al-Fiqhiyyah AI-K waytiyyah" [18:  191-192].
(5)  Al-Kasan i,  "Bada f' AI-Sana '+" [6:  16]; Al-'Tbadi,  AI-Jawharah  AI-Nayyirah"  [1:  316]; Al• Zayla'i,  "Tabyin A-Haqa 'ig" [4:  174]; and "Majallat AI-Ahkam AE-Adliyyah, article (686).



188





Sh arf'ah  Stan dard No.  (7)  Hawalh

contract. Since the latter can be concluded  on a deferred basis, so a Hawa•
ah transaction.(8
• The basis for the permissibility  of Hawalat al-Haqq (transfer of a right) as advocated by the Hanafis is  that its  essence is similar  to suretyship which is  permitted by all four schools  of Islamic law,  regardless ct the name of the contract in this regard.   Again, Hawalat al-Haqq does not significantly differ from restricted transfr  of debt. If one looks  at the change of creditor, then the transaction is one of transfer of rights, and ifone looks at the change of debtor, it is a restricted transfer of debt. 'The differences between transfer of debt and transfer of right are evident in some forms,  such  as when the creditor  makes  a gift of the amount of his debt claim against  the payer to a person who is  not a debtor to the transf ror.  Here,  there are  not two  debts,  hence  there  is  a transfer  of right and not a restricted Hawalah because of the lack  ct two debtors, as the transferor here is  not a creditor of the beneficiary from the gift.
Conditions  of Hawalah
• The basis for the necessity  of the consent of all the three parties in a Hawalah  contract is  as follows:
a)The transferor is required to consent because he might not want a third party to pay the debt on his behalf.  Therefore, his consent  is necessary for the permissibility of the Hawalah  contract.
b) The transferee  must also consent  to the  Hawalah contract because the Hawalah contract necessitates a transfr of his  right  to payment from the transferor  as  debtor to  another  person  (the  payer),  and people differ in various aspects when it comes  to payment of debts.
c) The payer must also consent in the unrestricted Hawalah because the effect  of the Hawalah contract is  to  make the  payer liable  for payment and,  as a principle;  there is no liability without there first being an acceptance of such liability."

(6)  AI-Sarakhsi,  A1Mabsut" [20:  71-72];  bn Nujym,  'Al-Bahr AI-Ra 'iq" [6:  270];  "Durar
AlHukkam" [2:  52];  and A!-Balkhi,  AlFatawa AL-Hindiyah" [3:  298]
(7)  Wahabah A1-Zuhayli,  Ai-Fiqh AL-Islami  Wa Adillatuh"  [5:  171].
(8)  Ibn Abidin,  "Radd A1-Muhtar" [5:  341]; and Mullah Khasru,  "Durar AI-Hukkam" [2: 308]



189





Sh arf'ah  Stan dard No.  (7)  Hawalh

■  The  basis for  the  requirement   that  the  transferred   debt  or the  trans• frrd part  of a debt be equal to the payable debt in kind,  type,  quality or amount  is to avoid Riba. However,  this condition does not mean that the liability of the transferor  must be  similar in quantity  to the liability of the payer towards  the transferor  in  order  to  make  a Hawalah  con• tract valid.  In other words, a Hawalah contract is permissible even if the amount  of one of the two liabilities  is  either  greater  or lesser than  the other  liability provided  that the transferee  will be paid only an amount equivalent  to  his debt.  For example, one  can transfer  the  right  to  his creditor  to collect  10 dinars,  the equivalent  amount  of his  debt,  out of the 20  dinars  be is owed.  The transforor  may also direct the transferee to collect five dinars  being his right against the payer out of the ten the transferor  owes the transferee.  'Therefore,  the similarity  in amount  that is required here is that the transferee must not take more than the actual amount  of his debt.  The intention  of this is to avoid Riba.
Effect  of Hawalah  on the Relationship Between  the Transferor  and  the
Transferee
• The  reason  for saying that  the  transfror  is   discharged  from  liability after the conclusion  of a Hawalah transaction is because this is  the legal effect ofHawalah.  Hawalah means that the other  party (the transferee) is deemed  to have received his right to payment  by the payer outright, which  connotes  its obligatory  nature.  Therefore,  the transaction can•
not  be reversed  for the simple  reason  that  if something is  transferred
then it  cannot  be argued that  it remains  in the same place.  This means the transf zree is not entitled  to ask the transf ror for payment  and the payer,  on the other  hand,  becomes  liable for payment.(o
The right  of the transferee  to have recourse,  in  the event of non-per•
formance  by the payer, to the transferor  as  advocated  by the Hanafis is based on a Hadith.  It is reported  that Uthman  Ibn Affan was asked about
a situation  in which  a transfer  of debt is concluded  and the transferee

(9)  AI-Ruhaybani,  "Matalib  Ul AL-Nuha" [3: 325]; AI Buhuti,  "KashshafAI-Qina" [3:  308]
"Hashiyat AI-Dusuqi 'Ala Al-Sharh Al-Kabir" [3:  327];  and Al-Sawi,  "Hashiyat Al-Sawi
'la Al- Sharh AI-Saghir"  [3:  426].
(10)  Tbn Qudamah,  41-Mughn [4:  338]



190





Sh arf'ah  Standard  No. (7)  Hawalah

found the payer had died in a state ct bankruptcy.  The answer was that the transferee is  entitled  to  return  to the  transferor  for payment, as the right of a Muslim cannot  go  unfulfilled. This report  reveals that the transferor has a right ct recourse to the original debtor if the payment is not attained due to bankruptcy  or death of the payer.
+  The Hadith that says, Muslims are bound by the  conditions they made
is  the basis for  the view of  the majority of  jurists that the transferee has a right of recourse to the transferor  if he had stipulated that he accepts the transfer on the basis that the payer is solvent and is capable of paying the amount  ct the debt. Moreover,  this stipulation  serves the purpose
of  the contract;  hence,  termination  of the contract  takes place if such
a condition  is  not met.(

The Effect ofHawalah on the Relationship  Between  the Transferor and
the Payer
The basis for  the rule that the transferor  loses his claim over the amount ct the debt against the payer after the Hawalah transaction  is  that the right to this claim has shifted to the transferee  by virtue of the contract of Hawalah.

The Effect of Hawalah on the Relationship  Between the Transferee and
the Payer

The basis for the rule that the transferee no longer has a financial claim against the transf ror  is  that the contract  of Hawalah  transf rs  the liability to pay to the payer.9"

The right of the payer to be entitled  to all rights associated with the securities  that  were available  to the  debtor  (the  transferor)  is  based  on the fact that  these  securities  are associated  with  the  debt  of the transfer or, which are the subject matter  of the Hawalah  contract. These rights are

(11)  Ibn  Qudamah, 4-Maughn" [4:  339].
(12)  This  Hadith has been related  by  AI-Bayhaqi  in "Al-Sunan Al-Kubra" [6:  79]  and  [7:
249],  Maktab at Dar AI-Baz; and Al-Daraqutni in his "Sunan  AI-Daraqutnt" [10:  27], Dar A!-Ma'rifah.
(13)  Ibn  Qudamah,  "AlMaughn!"  [4:  339]; AL-Buhuti,  "Kashshaf AI-Qina"  [3:  387];  and
AI-Buhuti,  "Sharh Muntaha  Al-Iradat"  [2: 136].
(14)  AI-Balkhi,  "4Fatawa Al-Hindiyyah [3:  297],  "Durar AI-Hukkam F Sharh Majallat
AL-Ahkam" [2:  36]  and AI-Kasani,  "Bada 'T A1-Sana r" [6:  18].



191





Sharf 'ah  Stan dar d No.  (7)  Hawalh

therefore   transferable with  the transfer  of the  debt  liability.  Hence,  the payer  is  entitled  to all these  rights  as well.

Eff.ect of Death  and Bankruptcy on a Hawalah  Contract
The  basis that  the  death  of the  transferor will not  affect  the  Hawalah contract  is that the transferor, after the Hawalah  contract, is not entitled  to the transferred debt.In  addition, the reason  why the death  of the payer will not affect  the  Hawalah  contract is  that  the  heirs  or the guarantor of the payer,  if any, will be liable for payment.

The practices of overdrafts, negotiable instruments and endorsing cheques and bills of exchange are valid because they are practical  applications  of the concept of Hawalah.

Transf er of Money  (Remittances)

The International Islamic Fiqh Academy has issued a resolution in respect to the permissible solutions for the combination of transfer of money (banking remittances)  and currency  exchange."


















(15)   Al-Mawsuah Al-Fiqhiyyah AI-Kuwaytiyyal  [18:  225];  "Qanun  AI-Mamalat Al• Sudani", article  (510);  and Jordanian  Civil  code, Article  (1005).
(16)  A!-Babarti,  4! 'Inayah  Sharh  AlHidayah"  ['7:  249];  A-Zaylai,  "Tbyin A!Haq4a 'i4" (4:   174]; Ibn Abidin,  "Tanqih Al-Fatawa AI-Hamidiyyah"  [1: 293]; Malik, "A! Mudawwanal" [4:  126-127];  Ibn Nujaym, AI-Bahr Al-Ra 'iq",  [6: 274]; and Al-Kasani, "Bada '?' AI-Sana'i" [6:  17].
(17)   "Durar Al-Hukkam F Sharh Majallat Al-Ahkam" [2:  36]; and Al-Mabsut" [20:  72].
(18)  International Islamic  Fiah Academy  Resolution No. 8 (1/9).



192





Sharf'ah  Standard No.  (7)  Hawalh





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Hawalah
Hawalah  is  the  transfer  ct a debt  liability  from the  transferor  to  the payer (i.e.  it is  a process ct changing  debtors  and creditors)

Muheel  (the transferor)

The transferor  is  the principal  debtor and who usually refers his creditor to a third party for the collection of the debt.  In some forms of Hawalah,  he may be a creditor.

Muhal

Muhal or the transferee  is the creditor or the party who accepts  the offer to collect his due from  the transf eror's debtor. He is  also known  as Muhal Lahu or  Muhtal  Lahu.
Muhal Alaihi
Muhal Alaihi is  the party accepting the debt liability that will be collected from him  by the transferee.  He is also  called  Muhtal Alaihi.

Hawalat al-Haqq

The transf 2r  of a right from  one creditor  to another


















193


























