Shari'ah Standard No.  (5)



Guarantees

(Revised Standard)












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page
Pref: ilce...................................................................................................     123
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        124
1.   Scope of the Standard..............................................................................        124
2.  General Rulings on Guarantees..............................................................        124
3,  Personal Guarantees .......osss.sos.sos.sssssssssssssssssssssssoos.so.sass.s.sos.so.o...                             15


5.  Cases cf Achieving the Objectives cf Securities...................................        129
6.  Some Contemporary Applications of Securities  ..........a.a.a......    129
7.  Date cf Issuance  cf the Standard...................................................................        134
Adoption  cf the Standard......................................................................        135
Appendices
Appendix  (a):   Brief History f the Preparation of the Standard.............         136
Appendix  (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard....................................         138
Appendix  (c):   Definitions.............................................................................         146























121








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE  ALL-MERCIFUL,  THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all his companions





Preface


The  aim  of this  standard   is  to  outline  the  Shari'ah  rules  governing guarantees,  and  to clarify  the  forms  of guarantees   that  are  permissible or prohibited.  It also outlines  some  significant  modern   applications  of guarantees   as employed  by  Islamic  financial  Institutions  (Institution/ Institutions).(






























(1) The word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer,  in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



123





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (5):  Guaran tees





Statement of the Standard


I. Scope  of the Standard

This standard covers securities  (Guarantees) intended to secure obligations and protect debts against procrastination  and default. Such securities may take the  form  of written  documents, attestations,  personal  guarantees, mortgages, cheques and promissory  notes. The standard  also explains the permissible and prohibited forms of securities. It also intends to distinguish between liabilities and the assets held on trust.

The standard  does not cover guarantees  against torts.

2. General  Rulings  on Guarantees

2/1   Permissibility of guarantees and their  relevance  to contracts

2/1/1  A contract of guarantee is permissible in contracts of exchange, e.g.  a contract  of sale,  or contract  of  rights,  e.g.  right of intel• lectual  property.  Such  a guarantee  contract  does not affect the permissibility of the original contract  in which  it is  required.  It is, moreover,  permissible to stipu1ate  a guarantee  into the body of an original at one time,  because guarantee  is  appropriate  to, or relevant  in, contracts.

2/1/2  There is  no objection in Shari'ah  to include a number of guaran• tees in one contract, such as  incorporating a personal guarantee together with a mortgage of security in the same contract.

2/2  Guarantees in trust (fiduciary)  contracts

2/2/1  It is not permissible  to stipulate  in trust  (fiduciary)  contracts, e.g. agency  contracts  or contracts  of deposits,  that a personal guarantee  or mortgage  of security  be  produced,  because such a stipulation  is  against the nature of trust  (fiduciary)  contracts, unless such a stipulation  is  intended  to cover cases of miscon•



124





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (5):  Guarant ees

duct,  negligence  or breach of conditions  or stipulations.  The prohibition   against  seeking  a guarantee  in trust  contracts  is more stringent in Musharakah  and Mudarabah  contracts, since it is  not permitted  to require  from a manager  in the Mudara• bah or the Musharakah  contract  or an investment  agent or one of the partners  in these contracts  to guarantee  the capital,  or to promise  a guaranteed  profit. Moreover,  it is  not permissible for these contracts  to be marketed  or operated  as a guaranteed investment.

2/2/2  It is  not permissible to combine agency and personal guarantees in one contract  at the same time  (i.e.  the same party acting in the capacity of an agent on one hand and acting as a guarantor on the other hand),  because such a combination  conflicts with the  nature  of these  contracts.  In addition,  a guarantee  given by a party acting as an agent in respect ct an investment  turns the  transaction   into  an interest-based   loan,  since the  capital Of  the  investment  is guaranteed   in addition  to  the  proceeds
ct the  investment,   (i.e.   as though   the  investment  agent  had
taken  a loan  and  repaid  it  with  an  additional  sum  which  is tantamount to Riba).  But if a guarantee  is  not stipulated  in the agency contract  and the agent voluntarily provides a guarantee to his clients independently  of the agency contract, the agent becomes a guarantor  in a different  capacity from that of agent. In this case,  such an agent will remain liable as guarantor  even if he is  discharged  from acting as agent.

2/3  Guaranteeing existing leased  properties

The  lessor  bears  the  risk associated  with  the  leased  property  and the  lessee  holds  it  on a trust  basis.  Hence,  it  is   not  permissible  for the  lessor  to  stipulate  in the  lease  contract  that  the  lessee  provide
a guarantee  or  mortgage  of security,  etc.,  so that  he may use it  to recover  the  amount   ct  the  lease  rental  if the leased  property   is damaged, unless such a stipulation is restricted to cases of misconduct, negligence or breach of contract.  Therefore,  the lessor  is liable  for the consequences of any damage to the leased  property  that is  not caused



125





Shan'ah  Standar d No. (5):  Guarant ees

by the misconduct  or negligence of the lessee,  and is  responsible  for any related insurance  expenses.  The lessor  also bears the expense  of any major  maintenance   work required  to  keep the leased property in the condition  necessary to provide the contractual  benefits under the lease.

2/4 Written documentation and attestation

2/4/1  Documentation  in writing is  recommended  by Shari'ah, whether such  documentation  is   in  the form  of ordinary   (private)  or official documents.   However, customary  practice  is  applicable in the drawing  up of such documents  and in determining the documents  that are relevant as proof (or have evidential value). It is prohibited  to forge  documents  or to conceal their contents or to destroy them so as to bring about the loss ct other peoples' rights.

2/4/2 Attestation in financial transactions is recommended  by Shari'ah.
It is also commendable,  and in case of necessity  it is  obligatory, to give testimony.  On the other hand, perjury  is prohibited  and is one of the major sins.

2/4/3 I is  not  permitted  to scribe  or  witness  acts  prohibited  by Shari'ah,  such  as certifying  or witnessing borrowing on  the basis  of interest.

3.  Personal Guarantees

3/1   Permissibility and types of personal guarantee

3/1/1  It is permissible for an Institution to stipulate  that a customer should  provide  one  or  more  guarantors to  secure  the  debts owed by the customer.

3/1/2  Personal  guarantees  are divided  into  two  types.  One  type is a guarantee  where the guarantor  has a right of recourse  to the debtor, and this guarantee  is offered at the request  or with the consent  of the debtor. The other  type is a non-recourse guar• antee, which is  offered  voluntarily by a third party without  the debtor's request or consent  (voluntary  guarantee).



126





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (5):  Guarant ees

3/1/3 An  Institution  is  not  entitled  to  guarantee  financial   com• mitments without  a right  of recourse to the  debtor,  i.e.  to be a non-recourse  guarantor,  unless  the  Institution  is already authorised by its shareholders and  investors  to  make  dona•
tions  or to perform  acts of benevolence.

3/1/4  It is  permissible to fix the duration  af a personal  guarantee.  It is also permissible  to set a ceiling on the amount  to be guaranteed and it is permissible  that the personal  guarantee be restricted by, or be contingent upon, a condition. In addition, it is  permissible that such a guarantee  be made contingent  upon  a future event, for example, by fixing a future  date at which liability will com• mence  and,  in this  case,  the  guarantor   may validly withdraw the guarantee, by notifying the creditor, before the prospective obligation  to be guaranteed  arises.

3/1/5  It is  not permissible to take any remuneration  whatsoever for providing a personal  guarantee  per se, Or to pay commission for obtaining  such a guarantee. The guarantor is, however, entitled to daim any expenses  actually  incurred   during  the period  ct a personal   guarantee,   and  the  Institution  is  not  obliged  to inquire  as to how the guarantee   produced  has been  obtained by the customer.  [see  item 7/1/1  and  7/1/2)]
3/2  Guaranteeing unknown  (Majhul) and  future debts

A valid guarantee  may be given fee debts,  the exact amount  of which is  unknown.  Similarly,  a valid guarantee  may be given for a debt that will arise in  the future.  However,  it is  permissible  for the guarantor to withdraw  such a guarantee  before a future  debt is  actually created, after notifying  the  person  having  interest  in  the  guarantee.  This  is
called a market (business)  guarantee,"  or a guarantee of contractual
obligation."  An example  of this  type is  a third  party's  guarantee  to refund  the  price to the  buyer  if it appears  that  the sold commodity belongs to a person  other than the seller and this guarantee  is known as Daman al-Dark  (dealers/business misrepresentation  guarantee).



127





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (5):  Guarant ees

3/3  The effect of a personal guarantee

3/3/1  The creditor  is  entitled  to claim the amount  of his debt from either  the  debtor  or the  guarantor   and  he  has the  choice  of claiming his right from either of them.  However, the guarantor is   entitled  to  arrange  the  order  of liability,  for  example,  by stipulating  (at the conclusion  of the contract of guarantee)  that the creditor  shall first claim payment  from the principal  debtor and  that  the  creditor  is  entitled  to  recourse  to the  guarantor for payment  only  if the  principal  debtor  refuses  to  fulfil his obligation.
3/3/2  If the creditor discharges the debtor from the debt, the guarantor is also discharged automatically from  his liability..  However, if the  creditor  discharges   the  guarantor  from  liability,  the debtor  remains  in debt.  If the  guarantor  secures a discount that  results  in paying  an amount  less  than  the  original  debt, the guarantor is entitled to  recover  only the  amount  he has actually   paid  to  the  creditor;  he  cannot   demand   that  the debtor  pay the debt in full ignoring the discount.  This rule is intended to prevent  a procedure being  used  that  potentially leads to Riha.  However, if the guarantor reaches an agreement with  the  creditor   to  settle  the  debt  using  as consideration a commodity of a different type from that in which the original debt was designated,  the  guarantor is  entitled to recover  the exact amount  of the commodity provided  as consideration for the debt, or the exact amount  of the debt,  whichever  is less.

3/3/3  It is permissible for a personal  guarantee  contract  to be desig• nated  in a separate  contract. It can also be concluded togeth• er with,  or before,  or after,  the  conclusion   of the  contract  of a credit  transaction.
3/3/4  If an Institution  manages transactions  on the basis ofMudarabah or Musharakah  or investment agency, it is not permitted for it to guarantee the fluctuations of currency exchange rates so that the investors  will recover their investment  shares irrespective of the behaviour of the currency market. Such a guarantee is prohibited



128





Shari'ah  Standar d No.  (5)  Guaran tees

because it is tantamount to the Mudarib or partner or investment agent guaranteeing  the capital  of other  partners  or  investors, which  is prohibited  by Shari'.ah.  [see  items  2/21  and 2/2/2]

3/3/5  If the contract  of a credit transaction stipulates  that the debtor shall provide  a guarantor and the debtor  fails  to provide  one, the Institution is entitled  to initiate legal action to force him to provide  a guarantor or to terminate  the contract.

4. Mortgage  (Rahn)

It is  to make a financial  asset or so tied to a debt so that the asset or its value is used for repayment of the debt in case of default.  [see  Shari'ah Standard No.  (39) on Mortgage]

5. Cases  of Achieving the Objectives of Securities

5/1   Bringing forward future instalments in case of default  on payment

It is  permissible  to include a term in a debt contract  to the effect that, ifthe debtor defaults on the payment of one or more instalments, some or all of the future instalments shall fall  due immediately,  provided the default was not caused by  unforeseeable  intervening  events or force majeure.  However,  this term shall not be effective until the debtor has been served with  a  reminder  notice  and after a reasonable period  of time has elapsed.

5/2  Termination of a sale on deferred payment terms in case of failure
to pay

The seller is entitled,  in a contract  of sale on a def rred payment basis, to stipulate that if the buyer fails to pay the price within a certain period of time,  the  seller is  entitled to revoke the contract  and repossess the sold asset without  recourse to the courts.

6. Some Contemporary Applications of Securities

6/1  Letters of guarantee

6/1/1  It is  not permissible  to take  remuneration for  issuing  a letter of guarantee,  whether it is  with cover or without  cover,  if the remuneration  is  intended   as consideration  for the  guarantee



129





Shan'ah  Standar d No. (5):  Guarant ees

per  se, since  the  amount  guaranteed and  the  duration  of the guarantee   are usually  taken into  consideration  in computing remuneration.

6/1/2 Asking an applicant for a letter of guarantee to bear administrative expenses incurred  in issuing a letter  of guarantee  of either type (i.e. preliminary or final) is permissible  in Shari'ah, provided the remuneration for such expenses do not exceed the commission that others would charge for such services. Where full or partial cover is  provided,  it is  permissible,  in estimating  the expenses for issuing  a letter  of guarantee,  to take into account  anything that will reflect the  actual  service to be rendered  in providing a cover for the transaction.

6/1/3  It is not permitted  for the Institution to issue a letter of guarantee in favour of an applicant  who will use it to acquire  an interest• based loan  or to conclude  a prohibited  transaction.

6/2 Documentary credit

It is  a written  undertaking by a bank (known  as the issuer)  given to the seller (the beneficiary)  as per the buyer's (applicant's or orderer's) instruction  or  is  issued  by  the  bank for  its own  use,  undertaking to pay up to a specified  amount  (in  cash or through   acceptance or discounting  of a bill of exchange),  within  a certain  period  of time, provided  that the seller present documents for the goods conforming to the instructions.

In brief, a documentary  credit  is  an undertaking  by  a bank to  pay subject to conformity  of the documents  to the contractual instructions, [see  Shari'ah  Standard No.  (14)  on Documentary Credit]

6/3  Use of cheques or promissory notes

There  is  no Shari'ah objection to obtaining cheques  or promissory notes from the debtor  (unless not allowed by law) as a means to force the debtor  to make timely payment  of instalments  in cash,  whereby
if the  debtor pays on time  such  cheques  or promissory notes  shall
be returned  to  him,  and  in the  event  of default  on payment   they



130





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (5):  Guarant ees

may be produced  for  recovery. The party providing  these  cheques or promissory notes as security is entitled  to obtain an undertaking from the Institution  that they will be used only for  timely recovery of its  due debts without any addition.

6/4  Insurance  for doubtful or bad debts

It is permissible  to subscribe  to an Islamic  insurance coverage  as security  for debt  obligations  and it is not permissible  that debts  be insured on a conventional   insurance  basis.

6/5  Freezing cash deposits  (blocking  withdrawals)

6/5/1  In  order  to  secure  the  future  payment  ct debts  on  a single payment  or an instalment  basis,  it  is permissible  for  the  In• stitution  to stipulate, that it is entitled to freeze the customer's investment  account, or to revoke his right to withdraw  money from  such  an account  entirely or to block an amount  in the account equivalent  to the debt, which is  the pref zrred option. Nevertheless, the customer  remains entitled to share profits on the whole balance  ct the  investment  account  after deducting the Institution's  share for  acting as a Mudarb.

6/5/2  In  a credit  transaction,  it  is  not permitted  for  the  Institution to  stipulate  a right  to  freeze the  customer's  current  account. However, a stipulation af this kind is allowed where the customer has freely, willingly and absolutely agreed to his current account to be  frozen.

6/6 Third  party  guarantees (voluntary  undertakings to compensate an investment loss)

It is permissible  for a third  party, other than  the Mudarib  or invest• ment agent or one ct the partners,  to undertake voluntarily  that he will compensate   the  investment   losses  of the  party, to whom  the undertaking is  given, provided  this guarantee  is not linked  in any manner  to the Mudarabah financing  contract or investment  agen• cy contract.



131





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (5):  Guaran tees

6/7 Underwriting the subscription of shares issued (subscription guar•
antee)

6/7/1  It is permissible  for the  Institution  to  undertake  that  it  will underwrite the remaining  shares offered for subscription  after the expiry of the offer period, provided  the shares are under• written  at  the  offer value without  any consideration  for the underwriting per se.

6/7/2 'The underwriter  is entitled to receive consideration  for a service it provides other than the guarantee, such as conducting a feasi• bility study  or marketing the shares.

6/8  Guarantees in tenders,  security deposits  inMurabahah transactions and 'Arboun  (Earnest  Money)

6/8/1   It is permissible to obtain guarantees for tenders and this includes both  the  amounts  paid  for  participating   in the  bid  (primary cash security for participating  in the bid) and the amounts paid when the contract is awarded to the successful bidder (final cash security providing  evidence of ability to complete the project). Such  amounts  shall be considered as being held on trust  by the
offeror of the  bid on behalf of the successful bidder,  and  are
not viewed as 'Arboun  (Earnest  Money).  Hence,  such amounts are recoverable  if they  are  intermingled  with  other  amounts of money  (i.e.  irrespective  of any unwanted  circumstances). Moreover,  it  is   not permissible  to confiscate such  amounts  of money, except in compensation  for an equivalent  amount  of financial  damage  actually sustained  in the  tendering  process. Such  amounts  may be  invested in the benefit ct the customer
with  his  consent,   unless  he  requests  it  to  be   credited  to  his
current  account.

6/8/2  It  is  permissible  for the  Institution,  in the  case  of a unilateral binding promise, to take a sum of money called  Hamish Jiddiyyah (security deposit)  from the purchase orderer  (customer) as se• curity for his promise.  'This sum of money is held on trust, not as



132





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (5):  Guaran tees

'Arboun, because no contract has been established. The rules set out in item  6/8/1  apply here.  Where the customer fails to honour his binding promise, the Institution is not permitted to retain the security deposit as such. Instead, the Institution's rights are lim• ited to deducting the amount ct any damage  actually incurred as a result  of the breach,  namely  the difference  between   the cost  of:  the  item  to  the  Institution  and  its  selling  price  to a third  party.

6/8/3  It is  permissible  to take  'Arboun from  a buyer or lessee  when a sale  or lease  contract  is  concluded,  on condition  that,  if the contract  is  not terminated  within the specified period  during which the option to terminate  the contract remains valid, such an amount will be considered as part of the consideration  for the contract and, if the buyer or lessee fails to perform  the contract within  this  period,  the seller or lessor  is  entitled  to retain the amount.  It is,  however,  preferable  that  the  Institution  should refund to the customer  any balance remaining  after deducting from the 'Arboun  the amount of any damage actually sustained by it.
6/9  Priority  right of recovery and the right to follow up

6/9/1  The  Institution  is   entitled  to  recover  first  its  tangible  items that  were sold to  or manufactured  for  a customer  and  have not been paid for and can be identified  among the assets of the customer.

6/9/2  The Institution is entitled to protect the integrity of the subject of a guarantee,  such as a mortgaged asset,  and pursue a legal  action against misusing it  if; it is  established that the person holding it is using it in a manner that may lead  to losses to be borne by the Institution.

6/9/3  The rights  of the parties holding mortgages of security shall  be given priority over the rights of the parties who are unsecured. [see  Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (39)]



133





Shan'ah  Standar d No. (5):  Guarant ees

6/9/4  In the event of bankruptcy or liquidation,  the parties  in charge of the liquidation have a preferential right or priority  over other creditors  in recovering  their  rights; i.e. the cost of any services provided  in the process  of liquidation.  [see  Sharf'ah  Standard No, (43) on Insolvency]

7. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 29 Safar 1422 A.H., corresponding to 23 May
2001  A.D.












































134





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (5):  Guaran tees





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'.ah Standard on Guarantees was adopted  by the Shari'ah Board in its meeting No.  (6)  held  on 25-29  Safar  1422 A.H., corre• sponding to 19-23  May  2001  A.D.













































135





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (5):  Guarantees





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In  its meeting  No   (2)   held  in Mecca on  10-14  Ramadan   1420  A.H., corresponding  to 18-22  December  1999  A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Board  decided to give priority  to the preparation  of a Sharl'ah  Standard  on Guarantees.

On Tuesday 27  Ramadan  1420 A.H.,  corresponding to 4 January 2000
A.D.,  a Shari'ah  consultant was commissioned to prepare  a juristic study and an exposure draft
In its meeting held in Bahrain on 18-19 Rabi' I,  1421  A.H., corresponding to  20-21  June  2000 A.D.,  the  Shari'ah  Committee   discussed  the juristic study and  made certain  amendments to it.  The committee  also discussed the exposure  draft of  the Standard  in its meeting  No.  (6)  held in Bahrain on 20-21  Jumada  II,   1421  A.H.,  corresponding  to  18-19  September  2000
A.D.,  and asked the consultant  to make some amendments in light of the comments  made by the members.

In its meeting No. (7)  held in Bahrain on 5-6 Sha'ban  1421  A.H., corre• sponding  to  1-2 November  2000 A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Committee  discussed the exposure  draft and made some  relevant amendments.

The revised exposure draft of the standard was presented to the Shari'ah Board in its meeting  No.  (5)  held in Mecca on 8-12 Ramadan  1421  A.H., corresponding  to  4-8  December   2000  A.D.  The  Shari'.ah  Board  made further  amendments   to  the  exposure  draft  of  the  standard  and  decided that it  should be distributed  to specialists and interested  parties in order to obtain their comments  in order to discuss them in a public hearing.

A public hearing  was  held in Bahrain  on 4-5 Dhul-Hajjah  1421  A.H., corresponding to 27-28 February 2001  A.D. The public hearing was attended



136





Shan'ah  Standar d No. (5):  Guarant ees

by more than 30 participants representing central  banks, Institutions, accounting firms, Shari'ah scholars,  academics and others who are interested in this  field.  Members  of the Shari'ah studies  committee  responded  to the written comments  that were sent prior to the public hearing as well as to the oral comments that were expressed in the  public hearing.

The  Shari'ah  Committee  held  its  meeting   No.  (8)   on  16-17  Dhul• Hajjah   1421  A.H.,  corresponding to  11-12  March  2001  A.D,,  to discuss the comments made  about  the exposure  draft. The  committee made  the necessary  amendments in light  cf both  the written comments that  were received  and oral  comments  that took  place in the public  hearing.

The Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. (6) held in Al-Madinah Al• Munawwarah  on 25-29 Safar  1422  A.H.,  corresponding to  19-23  May 2001
A.D., discussed the amendments made by the Shari'ah Committee, and made
necessary  amendments.  The Shari'ah Board unanimously  adopted  some  of the items of the standard  and some items were adopted  by the majority  vote of the  members  of the  Shari'ah  Board,  as recorded  in the  minutes  of the meetings of the Shari'ah  Board.

The  Shari'ah  Standards  Review  Committee  reviewed  the  standard  in its  meeting  held  in  Muharram  1433  A.H.,  corresponding  to  November
2011  A.D.,  in the  State  of Qatar,  and  proposed  after deliberation  a set of
amendments (additions, deletions,  and  rephrasing) as deemed  necessary,, and  then  submitted the  proposed amendments  to the  Shari'ah  Board  for approval  as it deemed  necessary.
In its meeting  No.  (38) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah, Kingdom
cf Saudi Arabia on 28 Shaban - I Ramadan  1435 A.H., corresponding to 26-
28 June 2014 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed  the proposed  amendments submitted  by the Shari'ah Standards  Review Committee. After deliberation, the Shari'ah  Board  approved  necessary; amendments,  and the standard  was
adopted  in its current  amended  version.









137





Shari'ah  Standar d No,  (5)  Guaran tees





Appendix  (B)

The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Permissibility of Guarantees and  Its Relevance  to Contracts

The basis of the permissibility of stipulating  guarantees  in contracts  is that it protects  property, which is  one af the objectives of Shari'ah.  The other authorities  mentioned  in the standard  in support  of each kind of guarantee can be cited  as authority  for the permissibility of guarantees in contracts.

Guarantees in Trust  Contracts

Assets held  on trust  must  be returned  to  their  owners  in the  manner in which  they were received  and in their  original  physical  state  promptly after the  owners  demand  their  return.  Allah,  the  Almighty,  says  {"Allah doth command you to render back your trusts to those to whom they are due}.   Since such  assets are not subject to exchange, they are purposely meant  either  for custody  with  permission  to  use them,  such as assets  on deposit,  or for charitable  acts,  such  as  a loan  of tangible assets.  Therefore, the  persons  holding  such  assets  are considered  by the  owners  from  the beginning as capable of returning  them to their owners on demand, making them trustees,  and as  a principle of Shari'ah,  a trustee  is  not held liable (for loss of,  or damage  to,  an asset held on  trust),  except in circumstances  of misconduct, negligence or violation of the conditions  agreed upon,  because in other circumstances  it  is inconsistent  with the fundamental  principle of trusts  for a trustee to be held liable.

Written  Documentation and Attestation
Written  documentation  is recommended  by Shari'ah.  This is  the opinion of the  majority  of Fuqaha,  in  contrast  to Ibn  Hazm  who  argued  that written documentation   is an obligation  (i.e.  if one did not put his financial

(2)  [AI-Nisa'  (Women):  58].



138





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (5): Guarantees

transactions  in  writing  he  has committed   a  sin)  relying  on  the  literal meaning  of the Qura nic  verse:  ""O ye  who believe!  When you deal with each other,  in  transactions  involving future obligations  in a fixed period time, reduce them to writing}and the Quranic  Verse:  {"Disdain  not to
reduce to writing your contract for a future period,  whether it  be small
or big    The  majority  of Fuqaha  have also inferred  that  this  verse itself excluded written  documentation in the cases of trustworthiness,  as the last part of the following verse  says:  {"And if one ofyou deposits a thing on trust with another,  let the  trustee  (faithfully)  discharge his trust and left  him fear Allah his Lord."}

It must  be  noted  that  customary   practice  is  the  basis in determining the form and  evidential  value of written  documentation,  because  Shari'ah did not specify a particular  manner  of writing to be considered.  As for the permissibility  of attestation  as documentation, the authority for that is the following  Qura 'nic  verse:   {"And  get out two witnesses,  out of your own men.  And if there are not two men, then a man and two women, such as
ye choose,  for witnesses, so that if one of them errs,  the other can remind
her),9

The  evidential  value  of attestation  according  to  traditional   Fuqaha  is stronger than  that of written  documentation.  But in modern  times,  things have changed  so that  some  laws  rely  on witnesses  only  in a very limited number of cases and paramount  importance  is given  to written documentary evidence.

Personal Guarantees

Permissibility of personal guarantees

Personal guarantees derive their permissibility  from the Qura 'n, Sunn ah, consensus  and reasoning.  In the Qura n, Allah, the Almighty, says:{"They said:  'We miss the great beaker of the king; for him who produces  it, is (the reward of) a camel  load; I will be bound  by it"), In Sunnah, there  is  the
Hadith  narrated  by Salamah  Ibn Al-Akwa,  who  said:  "We  were with the

(3)  [AI  Baqarah  (The  Cow):  282] (4)  [AI  Baqarah  (The Cow):  282] (5)  [AI  Baqarah  (The  Cow):  282]. (6)  [Yusuf(Joseph):  72].



139





Shari'ah  Standard  No,  (5)  Guarantees

Prophet  (peace be upon  him) when  a deceased person  was  brought.  'They said,  O Prophet of Allah, perform  prayers on him.' He (peace be upon him) said,  'Has the deceased  left anything?' They said,  'NO.' He  (peace  be  upon him) said, 'Is he  in debt?' They said, 'Three dinars.  He said,  'Perform prayers
on  your companion'  Abu Qatadah  said,  O  Messenger  of Allah,  perform
prayer on him, and I am responsible  for his debt!  Then the Prophet  (peace be upon  him) performed prayers  on him" In another  text of the Hadith, he (Qatadah)  said:  "I guarantee  (to  pay) his debt?«9

The Fuqaha are unanimous  on the permissibility  of personal guarantees. Moreover, the need of people for personal  guarantees  to facilitate dealings with each other had also made them legitimate, particularly  in the case of customers  who lack a good credit record. In addition, personal  guarantees encourage performance and prevent the contract  from being breached  and this  security also justifies  their permissibility.
The  objection  to taking  consideration  for personal  guarantees  is that giving  a guarantee   is  one  of the  charitable  acts  that  should  be  offered without  consideration, and this ruling has generated  consensus  among the Fuqaha.  Moreover, a personal  guarantee  indicates  a readiness  to give away the amount  of a loan,  which  means  that  the guarantor will pay the  loan (if the principal  debtor  fails to pay) and  have recourse  to the guaranteed person  for fulfilment.  Hence, it is not permissible  to take consideration for a guarantee, because  it is not permissible to take consideration for giving away the amount  of the loan  itself,  since such consideration is considered to be Riba.
Guaranteeing unknown and future debts

The Shari'ah  basis  for the permissibility  of guaranteeing  the  unknown
is  the  general  meaning  of the  Hadith:  "The guarantor  is   liable."  because

(7)  Related   by AI-Bukhari  in his "Sahih"  [2:  800], Dar bn  Kathir and Yamamah.
(8)  "Sunan AI-Nasa'1" [7:  317];  "Sunan Ibn Majal,  [2:  804];  and Al-Bayhaqi  in AI-Sunan
Al-Kubra" [4: 95].
(9)  The Hadith  has been related  by Ahmad,  Abu Dawud, and A!-Tirmidhi:  AI-Darari Al• Mudiyyah"  [1:   399],   Dar  Al-Jil;  bn  Mapah  in his "Sunan  Ibn Majah"  [2:  804],  Dar  Al• Fikr; and A!Bayhaqi in A!-Sunan A1-Kbra"  [6:  72], Maktabat  Dar Al-Baz.



140





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (5):  Guarant ees

this  Hadith   makes  no  distinction  between   guaranteeing the known  and the unknown since there  is  no harm  or element  of dispute  arising  due  to uncertainty here, because  the unknown transaction guaranteed will become certain  and known,  and the guarantor will know,  after the debt is  incurred, the actual obligation he undertakes. Another authority for the permissibility of guaranteeing what  is  not known  is  the  Quranic verse:  {"..for  him who
produces it, is (the reward of) a camel load and I will be bound by it.0
Here,  the guarantor guaranteed a camel  load  although  it was not yet a debt.

The  evidence  for  the  creditor's   right  to  demand   payment   from either the debtor  or the guarantor is  that the debt is  established  as liability of both cf them,  hence  the  right  to  demand   payment   from either  cf them.  The permissibility for stipulating that  the creditor has first to ask  for payment from the principal debtor  and that  he  may ask the  guarantor for  payment only if the  debtor fails  to pay, is  based  on an opinion  in the  Maliki school
of law  and it  is  also an opinion  of the Hanafis.   These  opinions  argued
that if the debtor  is solvent then  demanding payment  from the guarantor is pointless,  unless the debtor  refuses to pay.  So,  the requirement that payment be first sought  from the debtor  has a Sharl'ah  basis as well as being a case of adherence  to a principle cf natural  justice.

Bringing Forward Future Instalments  in Case of Default in Payment
The basis for this condition  is the Hadith of the Prophet  (peace be upon him):   "Muslims are  bound   by  the  conditions they  made, and because payment on a deferred  basis is  the  right  of the debtor,  and the debtor  may
choose to pay before time and relinquish the deferral of the date of payment entirely.  If this is the case, the date of payment may also be based  on default so  as  to  strengthen the  collectibility of the debt  and secure  payment  on time.  The basis of the rule enabling  the creditor to demand payment of all
instalments in the event of default,  instead  of waiting  until each instalment


(10)  [Yusuf (Joseph):  72].  "1 will  be bound by it means being a guarant or
(I1)  bn  Rushd,  AI- Bayan  Wa A!Tahsil"  [1:  291]. (12)  "Bada ? AI- Sana r [7:  2423].
(13)  Related  by Al-Bayhaqi   in  4l-Sunan  AL-Kbra" [6:  79],  Maktabat  Dar Al-Baz;  Al• Daraqutni in his  "Sunan  Al-Daraqutnr  [10:  27],  Dar Al-Ma'rifah;  Ibn  Abu Shaybah in his  "Musannaf [4:  450],  Maktabat Al-Rushd;  and Al Tahawi  in Sharh  Maani Al• Athar" [4:  90],  Dar AI-Kutub  Al-'Ilmiyyah.



141





Shan'ah  Standar d No. (5):  Guarant ees

is  due,  is  the  possibility  that  during  the  period  of delay in payment  the debtor  may find  a means  to conceal his assets and  claim insolvency. 'The permissibility   of this  condition   is  confirmed   by the  Resolution  No.  (51) issued  by the International Islamic Fiqh Academy.

Termination of a Sale on Deferred  Payment  Terms in Case of Failure to Pa

The basis for this  is  that  the seller has consented  to deferred  payment only if it will not lead  to a loss  af what is  due to him.  This is  the opinion  of the majority  of Fuqaha, as opposed  to the Hanafis who have confined the creditor's  right to litigation,  unless he has stipulated  the right to terminate the contract  and "Muslims are bound  by conditions  they made."

Guarantees and  Their Modern Applications

Letters of Guarantee

The basis  of the rule that no remuneration  may be taken  for  a guarantee per se is that it  is a surety, and as such  it is one of the contracts of charity. since it involves a readiness to give away the amount of a loan for no consideration. The majority of Fuqaha agree that it is  prohibited  to take consideration  for guarantee. However, issuing the letter of guarantee  is  a service that justifies charging fees

The  prohibition  of issuing  a letter  of guarantee  for  unlawful  acts  is analogous  to  the  prohibition  of giving  assistance   in committing  a sin. The Hadith:  "Allah  curses the one who gives Riba  and  the one who  takes  it and  the one who  writes its contract and  the  two witnesses  involved» also supports  this ruling,  because the personal  guarantor  has a stronger  role in
establishing  and recovering  a debt than  the writer  of the contract  and the witness  mentioned in the Hadith.
Documentary credits

The basis for the permissibility  ofi charging foes  for a documentary  credit is  that issuing  a documentary  credit is  a service performed  in  the interest of the applicant for the documentary  credit,  for which the Bank has the right to charge fees

(14)  Related   by Muslim   in his "Sahi"  [3:  1219],  Dar Ihya'  Al Turath Al-'Arabi; and the five
compilers of Hadith,  and see: Al-Shawkani   Nay! Al-Awtar" [5: 296], Dar Al-Jil.



142





Shari'ah  Standar d No  (5):  Guarant ees

Use of cheques  or promissory notes

The Shari'ah  basis for obtaining  cheques or promissory notes from the debtor  as a guarantee  is the general  sources on the permissibility  of guar• antees in general.
Insurance for debts

Islamic  insurance   is  based  on  the  principle  of donation,  and  Gharar is  tolerable  in such conditions.  In Islamic insurance,  the  instalments  that are paid are provided  within  a framework  of donations  organised  for the mutual benefit of the contributors to the insurance  fund. The permissibility of Islamic insurance  is  confirmed by the resolutions  issued  by the Islamic Fiqh Academy of the World Muslim League'and the International  Islamic
Fiqh Academy of the Organisation of Islamic Conference."   Although this form  cf insurance  fills  within  the meaning  cf a guarantee, the  guarantee here is  not provided  in return  for conditional  consideration  as such,  hence the  permissibility   of  subscribing   to  an  Islamic  insurance   coverage  as security for doubtful  or bad debts.

Freezing cash deposits

The basis for the permissibility of stipulating a right to freeze acustomer's investment account is  the permissibility of pledging funds, in addition  to the fact that the purpose  behind such freezing is  to be able  to agree on a set-off if it appears that the pledgor  of the balance  is in debt to the bank. It is  a form of mortgage to secure  a possible future debt. The basis for the prohibition  of stipulating a right to freeze a customer's current  account is  that such a right would be tantamount to a combination of a sale on def erred payment terms and a loan transaction;  ie,, it amounts  to a def erred sale with  a condition to provide  a loan, which is prohibited  by Shari'ah

Third party guarantees

The basis for third party guarantees is that they are a promise to volunteer to remedy a loss  of capital  under  an investment  contract with a party other

(15)   The First Session,  Resolution  No.  (5). (16)  Resolution  No.  9 (9/2).



143





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (5):  Guarant ees

than the volunteer.  This  is a permissible act as a volunteer,  as is evidenced in the Holy Qura'n:  {"No ground (of complaint)  can there be against such as do right,} A resolution passed by the International  Islamic Fiqh Academy states as follows:

"There is  no Shari'ah  objection to mention  in the prospectus  of the issue or in the documents  of Muqaradah  (Mudarabah)  bonds the  promise  of a third  party,  who  is   independent  personally  and  in terms  of financial liability  from  the  two  parties  to  the  contract,  to  volunteer  an  amount of money  for  no  consideration  to be  allocated  to  make  good  a loss  on a particular project. However, this  is  circumscribed with a condition  that such a promise should be an obligation independent  from the Mudarabah contract.  In other words,  the third  party's performance  of his obligation should  not  be  a condition  for the  enforcement  of the  contract  and  the conditions  and liabilities  of the parties  to the contract.  As such, holders of the bonds or the manager of the Mudarabah  are not entitled to claim that they may fail to honour their obligations relating to their contracts because the volunteer failed to fulfil his  promise because the performance  of their obligations takes into consideration the promise to volunteers

Underwriting the subscription  of shares issued

If such  underwriting  is  offered without consideration,  it is  considered as a personal guarantee for no consideration,  and this is permissible in Shari'ah. However,  if it is  for consideration, the basis for its prohibition  is what we have mentioned  in respect to taking a commission  for a guarantee.  [see  item  4/1]

Guarantees in tenders,  security  deposits  in Murabahah transactions and Arboun  (Earnest  Money)

The  basis for the  permissibility  of guarantees  in  tenders  and  earnest money  is the  afore-mentioned  authority  for guarantees  in general.  Both guarantees  in  tenders  and security  deposits  are permissible  because  they facilitate obtaining  compensation   for actual damages  in  case of breach  of contract.  The basis for obtaining  the earnest money to secure performance

(1I7)  [AI-Tawbah (Repentance):  91]. (18)  Resolution No. 30 (5/4)



144





Shan'ah  Standard  No. (5):  Guarant ees

is  the practice  ofUmar Ibn Al-Khattab  (may Allah be pleased  with  him) in the presence  of some companions  of the Prophet  (peace be upon  him), which has been permitted  by Imam  Ahmad.  A resolution  has been issued in connection  with the permissibility  of  'Arboun  (Earnest  Money) by the
International  Islamic Fiqh Academy.

Priority  right  of recovery  and the right  to follow up

The basis for the permissibility  of the priority  of certain  rights,  such as those of liquidators, is that these rights are considerations that are determined by the judiciary  on  the basis of public interest.  The basis  for giving priority to  a person  whose  assets  per  se   have contributed   to  the  increase  of the bankrupt's assets,  and have been located  and identified,  is the Hadith ct the Prophet (peace be upon him):  "If one sells a commodity,   and the owner thereof becomes  bankrupt,  and  then  he finds  it  without being  altered,  he  has more right  over it than the other  creditors."9  A resolution  in connection  with the permissibility  of pref zrence  was issued  by the Second  Fiqh Seminar  hosted by Kuwait Finance House, based on a number  of Fiqh  rulings determining certain  preferences that include priority  in the recovery of debts.  The right of following up the subject  of a mortgage is based on the fact that the aim of the mortgage  is  to facilitate recovery of the amount  of the debt and leaving the debtor without a right of follow-up will defeat this  objective.


















(19)   Resolution  No.  72  (3/8)  in respect of 'Arboun (Earnest  Money).
(20)  Related  by  A!Bukhari  and  Muslim  with diffe rent  texts  as follows:  1If one finds  his
property without  being altered  in  the possession of a bankrupt,  he has more right over it
than  the other creditors':  "Sahih Al- Bukhari" (H: 2402);  and Sahih Muslim"  (H: 1559).



145





Shari'ah  Standar d No,  (5)  Guaran tees





Appendix (C)
Definitions


Payables:
Debts that are absolutely payable  and liabilities held on trust basis,  either because of being contractually created, or because unjust  enrichment has given  rise to a liability for restitution.
Liabilities:

Liabilities held  on  trust  basis,  i.e.,  obligations  that  are  not  subject  to compensation  for any loss suffered except in circumstances of misconduct, negligence or violation  of the conditions  agreed upon.

































146






















Shariah  