Shari'ah Standard No.  (4)



Settlement of Debts by Set-Off

(Revised Standard)












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page
Pref: ilce...................................................................................................     107
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................         108
1.   Scope of the Standard..............................................................................        108
2.  Definition of Set-Off and its V:arious  Forms.........................................        108
3.  Bilateral Exchange of Promises to Conclude a Set-Off in the Future         110
4.  Application  of the Rules cf Set-Off to Some Modem Transactions..        111
5.  Currency Swaps........................................................................................        Ill
6.  Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................        112
Adoption  of the Standard......................................................................         113
Appendices
Appendix  (a):   Brief History  of the Preparation of the Standard.............         114
Appendix  (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard...................................          116
Appendix  (c):   Definitions............................................................................          117

























105








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE  ALL-MERCIFUL,  THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all his companions





Preface


The aim of this standard is  to outline the rules governing the use of set• off in settling  debts,  the Shari'ah  requirements  and conditions  applicable to set-off, what is  permissible or not permissible in this procedure and the most  significant  practices  of Islamic financial  Institutions  (Institution/ Institutions)"in this regard.






























(1) The  word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including  Islamic Banks.



107





Sharf'ah  Standard Na (4):  Settlement of Debts by Set-Off





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard  covers the settlement  of debt by way of set-off. 'The standard shall not apply to discharge  of liability by way of transfer,  waiving of obli• gation, composition, acquisition  of a right payable or bilateral cancellation of a contract,  as they are covered by their respective  Standards.

2. Definition  of Set-Off and  Its Various  Forms

A set-off is to extinguish a debt receivable by a debt payable.  It is  divided into two main  forms:  mandatory set-off and contractual set-off.

2/1   Mandatory set-off

A  mandatory  set-off is  a set-off  that  occurs  without   the need  for bilateral agreement or consent  of both  indebted  parties  and,  in some cases of mandatory set-off, it is one party that is forced to comply with the request of the other  party for set-off. It is  divided into compulsory set-off (on  both parties) and set-off on demand  (of the person  with the superior  debt whereby  the other  party  is  obliged to comply with the demand).

2/1/1  A compulsory set-off is  the spontaneous discharge  of two debts that is  not contingent on the request or consent of both or either party.

2/1/2  The conditions  of the permissibility of compulsory set-off are the following:
a) Each party  should  be a creditor and debtor  simultaneously. b) Both  debts  should  be equal  in kind,  type,  description  and
maturity.  However,  if the two debts are not equal in amount,
a set-off will take place  of an equivalent   amount on  both

(2) Compulsorily set-off is a set-off that occurs without a need to bilateral agreements or consents of the parties.



108





Sharf'ah  Standard Na (4):  Settlement of Debts by Set-Off

sides,  and the party  that is owed the larger debt will remain a creditor  for the remaining  balance.
c)  Neither of the two debts should be encumbered  by an obliga• tion to a third party, such as the right of a mortgagee to one of the debts.  The intention  of this is  to protect rights  associated with the amount ct the debt and belonging to thin! parties.
d) The set-off should not be arranged in a manner that results in violation of a rule of Shari'ah, such as Riba (usury)  a Shubhat al-Riba  (a transaction  potentially involving  Riba).

2/1/3  A set-off on demand  is the discharge of two debts at the request of the creditor for  the superior  debt and his consent to forgo the excess of the amount  or privilege he is  owed over what he owes. This set-off will take place whether  or not the creditor  for the smaller  debt consents.

2/1/4  The conditions  of permissibility  of a set-off on demand  are the following:
a) Each party should  be a creditor  and debtor  simultaneously. b) The creditor  for the superior  debt,  in terms  of quality  and
duration,  should  consent  to relinquish  his additional   right
or privilege.  An example  of superiority  in terms  of quality is  when  the debt is  secured by a mortgage, or when  a third party  has given a guarantee  to pay the debt,  and the owner of the  secured  debt  consents  to  relinquish   this  guarantee. Superiority   in terms  of duration   exists  if the  duration   of one of the debts  is  shorter,  or one debt is now due and the other  is  not yet due.  In these cases, the debt which has the shorter  duration  or which  is  now due is superior.
c) Both  debts  should  be  similar  in  kind  and  type,  but  not necessarily   in  quality  and  date  of maturity.   However,   if the  two  debts  are  not  equal  in  amount,  a set-off  will take place of an equivalent  amount  on both  sides, and  the party that  is owed the  larger debt  will remain  a creditor for the remaining balance.



109





Shari'ah Standard Na (4):  Settlement of Debts by Set-Off

d) The set-off should  not be arranged  in a manner  that results in violation  cf a rule  of Shari'ah,  such  as Riba  (usury)  or a transaction  potentially  involving Riba.

2/2 Contractual  set-off

2/2/1  A contractual  set-off is the discharge of two debts by the consent of the two parties to extinguish  their obligations towards  each other.

2/2/2 The conditions  of the permissibility of a contractual  set-off are the following:
a) Each party  should  be a creditor and debtor simultaneously. b) The two parties  should mutually consent  to the set-off.
c)  The set-off should  not be arranged  in a manner  that results
in violation of a rule of Shari'ah,  such  as Riba or a transaction potentially involving  Riba.
2/2/3 A contractual set-off is permissible even without the need for two debts to be similar in kind, type, description or maturity. This is because the agreement  on contractual  set-off means that each party has agreed to relinquish any extra privilege associated with
his  debt. A contractual  set-off is  also permissible if the two debts
are  not  equal in terms of amount,  in which case a set-off will take place of an equivalent amount on both sides, and the party that is  owed the larger  debt is entitled  to request payment of the remaining balance.  [see  item  2/10  (a)  of the Shari'ah  Standards on Trading in Currencies]

3. Bilateral Exchange  of Promises to Conclude a Set-Off  in the Future

It is  permissible for the Institution  and its customers or other Institutions to  exchange  bilateral  promises  that  debts  that  may be  created  between them  in the future will be settled by way of set-off,  in which case all the conditions  mentioned  in the items  2/1  and  2/2 will be applicable at  the time of actual set-off.  However,  if the currencies  of the two debts differ, a bilateral exchange of promise of set-off should be concluded on the basis



110





Sharf'ah  Standard Na (4):  Settlement of Debts by Set-Off

that a set-off will take place based on the current currency  exchange  rate at the time of actual  set-off  this  ruling is to prevent the practices  of Riba by roundabout methods  or by implied agreement  for practicing  Riha.

4. Application of the Rules  of Set-Off to Some Modern Transactions

Tbe followings  are some rules of set-off to modern transactions:

4/1   Stipulating set-off between the customer  and the Institution  in respect of debts to the Institution  arising out of sales on deferred payment. 'The agreement  on contractual  set-off of future debts, commonly  known as set-off and consolidation,  is  a practice  employed  by a large  number of financial  Institutions.  This  form  of set-off may take  place either compulsorily  or contractually depending  on wbether the situation that gives rise to this set-off meets the conditions of compulsory set-off or the conditions  of contractual  set-off. Moreover,  by pre-stipulating this type cf set-off in the agreement,  a fresh agreement  may be avoided  at the time cf set-off when the two currencies  are diffierent or when one
of the debts is superior  to the other.

4/2  A set-off  may take  place  between  a financial  Institution  accepting a cheque  and the drawer  of the cheque, through the clearing-house. This  form  of set-off  may  also  take  place  either   compulsorily  or contractually depending on whether the state that  gives rise to this set-off meets the conditions of compulsory set-off or the conditions of contractual set-off.

4/3  Set-off that  is   concluded  among   fi nancial  Institutions  through international  or national networking systems,  such  as credit  card or  debit  card  organisations.  This  form  of set-off may  be either compulsory or  contractual depending  on  whether the  state  that gives  rise to this set-off meets the conditions of compulsory set-off or the conditions of contractual set-off.

5. Currency Swaps

Tbe currency  swaps that are concluded on the basis ofRiba are not permis• sible.  Tbis is because in  this  process it is the interest-based  securities  that are set-off against interest-based securities.



111





Sharl'ah  Standard Na (4):  Settlement of Debts by Set-Off

6. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 29 Safar 1422 A.H., corresponding to 23 May
2001  A.D.




















































112





Sharf'ah  Standard Na (4):  Settlement of  Debts by Set-off





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah  Standard  on Settlement  of  Debts by  Set-off was adopted by the Shari'ah Board in its meeting No.  (6) held on 25-29 Safar  1422 A.H., corresponding  to 19-23 May 2001  A.D.













































113





Shari'ah Standard Na (4):  Settlement af Debts by Set-off





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No.  (2) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah  on 10-14 Ramadan
1420  A.H., corresponding  to 18-22  December  1999 A.D. the Shari'ah  Board decided to give priority to the preparation of a Shari'ah Standard on settlements of debt by way of set-off.

On Tuesday 27 Ramadan  1420  A.H.,  corresponding  to 4 January  2000
A.D,,  one Shari'ah  consultant  was commissioned  to prepare a juristic study and an exposure draft.
In its meeting held in Bahrain  on 18-19 Rabi' I,  1421  A.H.,, corresponding to  20-21  June  2000 A.D.,  the  Sharf'ah  Studies  Committee  discussed  the juristic  study  and  made  certain  amendments   to it.  The  committee  also discussed the exposure draft of the Standard in its meeting  No.  (6)  held in Bahrain on 20-21  Jumada  II,  1421  A.H.,  corresponding  to 18-19  September
2000 A.D.,  and asked  the consultant  to make some amendments  in light of
the comments  made by the members.

In its meeting  No.  (7)  held in Bahrain  on 5-6 Sha'ban  1421  AH., cor• responding  to 1-2  November  2000 A.D., the  Sharf'ah  Studies Committee discussed  the exposure  draft and made some relevant amendments.

The revised exposure  draft of the standard  was presented  to the Shari'ah Board in its meeting  No.  (5)  held in Mecca on 8-12  Ramadan  1421  A.H., corresponding  to  4-8  December   2000  A.D.  The  Shari'ah  Board  made further  amendments  to  the  exposure  draft  of the  standard   and  decided that it should be distributed  to specialists and interested  parties  in order to obtain their comments  in  order to discuss them  in a public hearing.
A public  hearing was held in Bahrain on 4-5 Dhul-Hajjah 1421  A.H., cor•
responding to 27-28 February 2001A.D. The public hearing was attended by



114





Sharf'ah  Standard Na (4):  Settlement of Debts by Set-Off

more than  30  participants  representing central banks,  Institutions,  account• ing firms,  Shari'ah  scholars, academics and others who are interested in this field.  Members of the Shari'ah  Studies Committee responded to the written comments that were sent prior to the public hearing as well as to the oral com• ments that were expressed in the public hearing.

The Sharf'ah Studies Committee  held its meeting No. (8) on 16-17 Dhul• Hajjah  1421  A.H.,  corresponding   to  11-12  March  2001  A.D.,  to  discuss the comments  made about  the exposure  draft.  The  Committee  made the necessary  amendments   in light of both  the  written  comments  that  were received  and oral comments  that took place in the public hearing.

The Sharf'ah  Board  in its meeting No  (6)  held in Al-Madinah  Al-Mun•
awwarah on 25-29 Safar 1422 A.H.,,  corresponding  to 19-23  May 2001  A.D, discussed  the  amendments   made  by  the  Shari'.ah  studies  committee,  and made  necessary  amendments.  The  Shari'ah  Board  unanimously  adopted some of the items  of the standard  and some items were adopted by the ma• jority vote of the members of the Shari'ah  Board, as recorded in the minutes of the meetings of the Shari'ah Board.

The Shari'ah Standards  Review Committee  reviewed the standard  in its
meeting  held in Muharram   1433  A.H.,  corresponding to November  2011
A.D.,  in the State of Qatar,  and proposed  after deliberation  a set of amend• ments (additions, deletions, and rephrasing) as deemed necessary, and then submitted  the proposed amendments  to the Shar'ah  Board for approval  as it  deemed necessary.
In its meeting No.  (38) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah, Kingdom of
Saudi  Arabia on 28  Sha'ban  to  l  Ramadan  1435  A.H.,  corresponding  to 26-
28 June 2014 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the proposed  amendments submitted by the Shari'ah  Standards Review Committee.  After deliberation, the Shari'ah  Board  approved  the necessary amendments,  and the standard
was adopted  in its  current  amended version.









115





Sharf'ah  Standard Na (4):  Settlement of Debts by Set-Off





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


The basis for debt settlements by way of set-off is that it has been practised from  time  immemorial  without  any report  ct disapproval.  Moreover,  set• off is in line with the objectives  of the Shari'ah  as t encourages discharging individuals  from liability ct debt  and set-off is  one way ct discharging debt
liabilities without  involving  futile processes  of debt recovery.

In addition, there is  no  Shari'ah  objection to a set-off taking  place  on demand.  The authority for this permissibility is that  the person  entitled to the  superior  debt  has agreed  to  forgo  the advantage attached to his  debt and the Shari'ah  will not object  to such a gesture.

If set-off is executed  contractually,  it is then based on the prophetic Hadith stating; "Muslims are bound  by the conditions  and agreements  they have made, except a condition  that has rendered the unlawful lawfl or rendered the lawfl unlawful.

















(3) The Hadith  has been  related  by A-Tirmidhi in his "Sunan A1Trmidhi" [3: 634]  edited by Ahmad Muhammad Shakir and others,  Beirut: Dar Ihya'  Al-Turath Al-'Arabi. Also, it has been related  by Al-Bayhaqi  in his Sunan  AI-Bayhaqf" [7:  248];  and AI-Manawi, "Fayd Al-Qadir" [6:  272], Egypt: AI-Maktabah  AI-Kubra,  1356 A.H.



116





Sharf'ah  Standard Na (4):  Settlement of Debts by Set-Off





Appendix (C)
Definitions


Debt and Loan
A debt is  any liability that is  not in terms of a specified or defined item, whatever the cause of its establishment,  i.e.  whether its origin  is in cash or in a commodity, or in a particular  described benefit such as the benefit of using particular  things or services cf persons.  For instance, the consideration  in defi erred  sales and loans  is  described as a debt.

The relationship between a loan and a debt is that the latter is more general than the former,  since every loan  is  described  as a debt but the converse is not true.  Not all  debts originate  from a loan.  In this sense,  a loan  is  but one cause of the creation of debt.

Due Debt

A due debt  is  a debt that  is  immediately  payable or that  is  payable on the  creditor's  demand,  whether  on its  original  due  date or,  if it  has been rescheduled  and deferred,  on its  rescheduled  due date.

Deferred Debt
A def erred  debt is  a debt the payment  thereof is  due at a certain time in the future,  and it may also be due in periodic  instalments  over time.

Description

A description is  a condition that distinguishes particular specimens of the same species from one other.  For examples,  conditions such as good quality and poor quality, or mortgage of security or personal guarantees,  letters of guarantee and the freezing of the amount of cheques for payment which are attached to the debt are considered descriptions.
Ibra'  (discharge)
An act by a person to discharge another  person from a liability (owed by
the latter  to the former)



117





Sh ari'ah  Standard  Na (4):  Settlement  of Debts by Set-off

Reconciliation (Sulh)

An agreement  to solve dispute between parties. Iqalah  (Mutual  Rescission  of Contract)
Revocation  of a contract  and  cancellation  of its  effects  with  mutual
consent  of both  parties.

















































118

























