Standard No.  (6)



Conversion of a Conventional
Bank to an Islamic Bank












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page

Pref: ilce...................................................................................................        151
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................         152

1.   Scope  of the Standard..............................................................................         152
2.  Time Frame for  the Conversion ........so.sos.so.sos.so.cos.sos..coo..o.a...         152
3,  Necessary Measures for Conversion  .........sos.sos.so.sos.sos.coos.so.o.....         153
4.  Dealings with Banks.................................................................................         154
5.  Providing  Bankin g Services in Permissible  Ways ..............a....a..    155
6.  Effect   of  Conversion  on  the  Interest  Based Receivables  and  Their
Shari'ah  Alternatives.................................................................................         155

7.  Effect  of Conversion  on Investments..........s.as..as.so..s...a..............         156
8.  Treatment   of  the  Bank's   Non-Permissible    Existing   Receivables
before the Decision to Convert...............................................................         157
9.  Treatment   of  Non-Permissible   Liabilities  before  the  Decision  to
Convert,  Whether  the Conversion  ls  Internal  er External..................         158

10.  Disposal of Impermissible  Earnings  .............................................         159

I 1.  Zakah  Obligation  on the Bank  before the  Decision to Convert.....         160
12.  Date d Issuance  of the Standard...........................................................         160

Adoption  of  the Standard......................................................................         161

Appendices
Appendix (a):   Brief History cf the Preparation  of the Standard.............          162
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard.....................................         164













149








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE  ALL-MERCIFUL,  THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all his companions





Preface


The  aim  of this  standard  is to  explain  procedures,  mechanisms and treatments  that  are  required    for   converting  a  conventional  bank   to an Islamic  bank  (bank/banks)"that observes  the  rules and  principles of Shari'ah in its operations and financial relationships, and, at the same time, embraces  the  objectives  and  functions of Islamic  banking   services.  The standard  also includes  an outline  of significant Islamic banking  activities that  constitute alternatives  to conventional banking  practices  that  are in place prior  to conversion.

























(I) The word (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer,  in short, to Islamic  financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



151





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard  covers fundamental  mechanisms  for converting  a conven• tional bank to a bank that complies with Shari'ah  rules and principles  right after the decision to undertake immediate comprehensive conversion within a particular designated period that is  announced, whether  such a decision comes  from within  the bank or from outside  the bank to be converted by outside  parties  interested  in converting it.  The standard  covers the time frame required for the conversion, the effect of conversion on the methods used to solicit  and receive  deposits,  and the method  to be used to invest such deposits. The standard  provides guidance on how to treat the receiv• ables and liabilities  realized by the bank prior to the conversion,  whether or not such receivables and liabilities are received or paid.  The standard includes a treatment  of the prohibited  assets that are in the possession of the bank before conversion and the appropriate ways of disposing of them.

The standard  does  not  cover activities  of the  converting  bank  that  are naturally  permissible  or the  profit made  by permissible  means,  as these are not the subject  matter  of the conversion.  This is  because  there  is  no Shari'ah  objection  to the  bank  continuing such  activities or employing them  for its  own benefit.  The standard   also does not  cover activities  cf
Islamic windows  or departments  or units in conventional  banks.

2. Time  Frame for  the Conversion

2/ 1    I is  necessary   that  all Shari'ah  requirements  be  executed   in  the process  of converting  a conventional  bank  to  a potential   Islamic bank.  It is  also necessary  that  the Shari'ah  rules  and  principles   be observed   in  respect  of all  new  transactions  after  conversion.  In principle,  the  transactions  that  are  concluded   before  the  decision to  convert  must  be ceased  or  disposed   of immediately.  It is  not permissible    to  delay   clearing   out   non-permissible  transactions



152





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank

unless such delay becomes a necessity   or a pressing need. Thus, the circumstances surrounding  the conversion must be taken into consideration  in order to avoid the risk of failure or a breakdown of the bank's operations, taking into account that the provisions of. this standard will be applied to accommodate the situation.

2/2 If the  bank did not decide on an immediate  and comprehensive conversion as per item 2/1  and decided to adopt a gradual  or partial conversion,  then it  is  not regarded as  a converted bank and may not be  granted a licence as an Islamic bank unless the conversion process  is  completed.  The shareholders are required to accelerate the process of: conversion  in order to free themselves from the sin of impermissible  activities.  This standard may be  used as a guideline for identifying the steps of: conversion.

2/3  The impermissible  profits realised and transactions  concluded during the period of conversion  can be treated  as per the explanation in items
8-11.

3.  Necessary Measures for Conversion

3/1   For  the success   of: the process  of conversion,  it  is  necessary that the bank set up all necessary  procedures, create the required tools, explore alternatives  to  non-permissible  financial practices,  and train  and promote  the personnel  required  for proper implementation of:  the procedures of conversion.

3/2  The  appropriate  administrative arrangements must  be in  place,  in• cluding changing the bank's operating license if required by the  super• visory authorities,  and amending the bank's  by-laws  (memorandum and articles of association) through the required procedures so  that they include objectives and operational measures that are appropriate to Islamic banking.  The by-laws must be cleansed from anything that contradicts the nature oflslamic banking.

3/3  Restructuring the organizational structure  of the bank and its em• ployment procedures, conditions  and employee statutes to fit the situation  of conversion.



153





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank

3/4  Formation  of a Shari'ah  supervisory  board  and an internal  Shari'ah compliance department in accordance with the Governance Standards issued by Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial Institutions.

3/5  Reformatting or designing standard contracts or specimens or exem•
plars of documents  that comply with Shari'ah  rules and principles.

3/6 Opening accounts with local or international  Islamic banks and revamping  of the accounts that are maintained  with local  or corre• sponding  conventional  banks  [see,  item  4 (b)].  Any dealings  with conventional banks must be limited  to the magnitude  of the need to do  so.

3/7  Preparing a special programme  fa- preparing personnel and training them to deal with  the application of Islamic banking practices.

3/8 Taking necessary  measures for the implementation of accounting, auditing, governance,  and  ethics  standards  issued by Accounting and Auditing  Organization  for Islamic Financial  Institutions.

4.  Dealings with Banks

4/1   Exerting all possible efforts to adapt the ways of dealing with central banks regarding  deposits, liquidity  needs or otherwise  in a way that does  not  conflict  with  the  rules  of  Shari'ah,  especially  rules  that govern  Riba transactions.  The  possible  alternatives  to  the  reserve amount required by law include, among others, depositing receivables represented by commercial paper to be paid later by customers instead of   accepting  the  freezing  of   the  cash account.  The  bank  can  also finance  government   projects  using  Islamic  instruments.   Among the possible alternatives for the purpose  of  set-off is  for the bank to maintain  current  accounts  that  accrue  no interest  or disposing  of the  interest  earned,  if that  is  impossible,  and adapting  the ways of dealing with the central bank for acquiring liquidity, for example,  by the opening of investment  accounts for the central bank.

4/2 Revamping the transactions  with conventional  banks on the basis of Riba free transactions  and the application of instruments  acceptable by Sharf'ah.



154





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to  an Islamic Bank

4/3  Intensifying  transactions  with Islamic  financial  Institutions   through bilateral exchange of current  or investment  accounts and considerable cooperation  in  the areas  of remittances,   documentary  credits and syndicated  financing.

5. Providing Banking Services  in Permissible  Ways

In providing  banking  services, it is  not permissible for the bank to receive interest  as compensation  for  services  rendered.  It is  a requirement that an Islamic  alternative   be worked  out,  such  as treatment of uncovered documentary credits through Murabahah,  Musharakah or Mudarabah in  accordance   with  the  rules  of Shari'ah.  It  is  not  permissible   to  take a commission  for providing   a mere  facility. However,  the  commission may be linked to expenses  incurred  for the execution  of the credit facility accordingly.

6. Effect of Conversion  on  the  Interest  Based  Receivables  and  Their
Shariah Alternatives

6/1  All traces  of conventional  transactions whereby the bank originated monetary assets and is liable to pay interest for them must be liquidated. This is the rule whether such transactions involve individuals, banks or central banks. This  liquidation  includes,  among others,  the conditions relating to the  deposits,  preference  shares,  investment bonds  and interest-based   certificates  that  were  issued  by  the bank before  the decision for conversion.  [see item  9]

6/2  The bank must confine  itself to permissible operations for acquiring the necessary  funds to operate  or to meet  its liabilities. Examples  ct such operations are:

6/2/1  The shareholders may increase  their  share  capital  in order  to increase  the bank's  capital  and  provide  a basis for attracting investment accounts and current accounts.

6/2/2  Issuance oflslamic certificates such as Mudarabah, Musharakah or Ijarah certificates within  the parameters  of Shari'ah.

6/2/3 Concluding  Salam  contracts  whereby   the bank acts  in  the capacity  of a supplier,  or Istisna'a contracts whereby  the bank



155





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank

acts  in  the  capacity  of a manufacturer  or  builder  with  the condition  that the contract price of the Istisna'a is paid to the bank in advance,  although  the deferment of payment  of the
price in Istisna'a is allowed by Shari'ah.

6/2/4  Concluding  a sale-and  leaseback  deal by selling some  of the assets  of the  bank for  liquidity  and  leasing  them   back  by means  of an ljarah  contract. This  transaction   must  take into account the Shari'ah  Standards on ljarah and Ijarah  Muntahia
Bittamleek whereby the contract  of sale must be independent from the contract  of lease, i.e. the two contracts must  remain separate from each other.

6/2/5 Concluding  Tawarruq deals in line with Shari'ah principles  by buying a commodity  on a deferred  payment  basis and selling it to a third party, other than the previous seller, for immediate payment.
6/3  If the  capital  ct the  bank  has  increased   due  to  non-permissible transactions  or the accumulation of reserves based on non-permissible transactions,  then  its  treatment   must  be  in  accordance   with  the treatment  of non-permissible receivables or other  non-permissible assets in the possession  of the bank  as discussed  below.  [see items 8 and  10]

7.  Effect of Conversion  on Investments

7/1   AII interest-based  investment   instruments must  cease to be  used and must be replaced  by permissible  investment  instruments such as Mudarabah, all Shari'ah-nominate partnerships, diminishing Musharakah,  sharecropping  partnerships  (agricultural,  planting or  irrigation  partnership)  or  financing by way of deferred  sales, Murabahah,   Salam,   Istisna'a,  operating  Iljarah,   ljarah   Muntahia
Bittamleek  or other  permissible financing  and  investment   instru•
ments.

7/2  All possible efforts must be exerted to terminate all interest-based loans that the bank has made before the decision to convert,  whether  such loans  are medium-term  or long-term  facilities,  followed by converting



156





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank

the principal  amounts  to  financing  instruments  in accordance  with the rules and principles af Shari'ah.  If the bank is unable  to terminate some of these loans,  then the bank must dispose of the interest earned in the manner  explained in item  10/2.

8. Treatment of the Bank's Non-Permissible Existing Receivables before the Decision  to Convert

8/1   Non-permissible assets of the bank originated  or acquired  before the decision to convert
Starting  from  the  financial   period   in which  the  bank decides  to
convert,  the following must be done:

8/1/1  If a conventional  bank is  acquired with the intention  to convert it to an Islamic bank, the new owners are not obliged ID  dispose of interest  and  impermissible  earnings  that  have been  earned before such acquisition.
8/1/2  If a conventional bank is  converted  by its existing shareholders into an Islamic bank, then the process of disposing of interest and impermissible  earnings  should  be considered  as commencing at the beginning  of the financial period in which the conversion starts  to take effect. However,  for any impermissible  earnings that  have been distributed  prior  to conversion,  it  is  necessary, on  ethical  grounds,   for  the  shareholders   and  depositors  to
whom  these earnings  have been distributed  to dispose of them personally.  The bank is  not bound  to do so.

8/1/3  Revenues  not  yet received that  are  of  doubtful  permissibility are  not  subject  to  compulsory  disposal,  whether   they  were earned before or during  the financial period  in which the bank decides to convert. The same rule applies to revenues of doubtful permissibility  that have been already received because of a belief that they are permissible  on the basis of  (I) an interpretation  of a person  who is  qualified to perform  Ijtihad on issues that  are subject  to personal  juristic  interpretation,  (II)  juristic  position of an  authoritative   school  of Shari'ah  or  (III)  the  opinion  of
some eminent  and knowledgeable  scholars.



157





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank

8/1/4  If the  bank has  rights  to prohibited non-monetary  assets,  it may receive them with the intent to destroy them. If the bank is entitled to receive consideration for supplying non-permissible assets or services, the bank may receive the consideration  with the intent to donate  it to charity. The same rule applies to any income  that  has  been  acquired  from  non-permissible  assets
during  the  period   in which  the  bank decides  to  convert.  In
both cases, the customer  should  not be allowed to avoid paying the  amount   receivable  or  the  consideration,  otherwise   such a customer would end up being entitled  to two counter-va1ues of the same transaction:  the good or service supplied  and the price payable for it.
8/1/5  If the bank is  converted and  it has,  among  its  tangible  assets, impermissible  commodities,  the  bank is   obliged  to  destroy them.  If the bank  has sold some of these  commodities and is yet to receive the price thereof, the price must be received and be donated to charity.

8/1/6 If the property  assets of the bank  are locations designated  for non-permissible activities, they should be changed to locations designated  for permissible operations  and services.

9.  Treatment  of Non-Permissible Liabilities before  the Decision  to Con•
vert, Whether the Conversion Is Internal  or External

9/1  Internal conversion

9/1/1  If the liabilities are in the form of payment  of interest, the bank should  employ all lawful means  to avoid paying such interest. This rule does not apply to the principal  amounts  of debts or loans.  The bank should  not pay interest except on the basis of dire need.
9/1/2  If the liabilities are in the form of obligations  to provide  non• permissible services, then the bank is obliged to make every effort to  terminate  such  liabilities,  by refunding  the  consideration, even if it  has to pay compensation  for non-fulfilment   of such obligations.



158





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank

9/2  External conversion through acquisition  of the  bank by parties
interested in converting  it.

If the purchaser  is  capable of negotiating  a deal  that could exclude all non-permissible receivables (e.g. interest and non-permissible assets) from  the  acquisition   deal  in a way that  will make  the seller  solely liable for  non-permissible liabilities,  then  the Shari'ah  requires  that the purchaser  do so.  However,  if the acquisition  cannot  be concluded
unless all assets ct the bank including  the non-permissible assets and
receivables are acquired,  then the purchaser is  required  by Shari'ah to act as quickly as possible to dispose of non-permissible liabilities even if the purchaser  has to suggest to the creditors  of the bank an earlier repayment  for a discount.

9/3  Treatments for impermissible  mortgages

The shareholders  must accelerate the redemption  ct all impermissible mortgages  attached  to the assets ct the bank. In the case ct external conversion, the buyer must stipulate that the seller replaces impermis• sible mortgages with permissible ones.

10.  Disposal of Impermissible Earnings

10/1    All impermissible   earnings  acquired  by the bank before  conver• sion that need to be disposed  ct as per the rules  in this  standard must  without  delay be paid to charity,  unless it is  difficult  to do so, for example, where complete disposal promptly will lead to the collapse of the bank er bankruptcy.  In this  case,  the implementa• tion of conversion  can reasonably take place gradually.

10/2    Any interest and other non-permissible earnings  should be chan• nelled to charity  and general  public  utilities.  It is  not permissible for the bank to use this money, directly or indirectly, for its own benefit.  Examples of charitable  channels  include,  among  others, training  people other than the staff of the bank, funding  research, providing   relief  equipment,   financial   and  technical   assistance
for Islamic  countries  or Islamic scientific,  academic  Institutions, schools,  anything  to do with spreading  Islamic  knowledge,  and



159





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to  an Islamic Bank

similar channels.  The charity  money must go  to these channels in accordance with the resolutions  of the  Shari'ah  Supervisory Board of the bank.

11. Zakah  Obligation on the Bank before  the Decision  to Convert

When   the conversion   is   initiated  by   outsiders   who  acquired   the conventional   bank  for  the purpose   of converting   it,  then  they  are not  obliged  to  make  Zakah  payment  for  the  past  financial  periods because the Zakah  for previous periods  is  the liability of the previous owners.  The Zakah liability  will start  to exist for the new owners from the  date  of the decision  to  convert.   For  the  purpose  of  discharging
the  responsibility  to  pay Zakah,  the  owners  may  apply  the  Shari'ah
Standard  No.  (35)  on Zak.ah.  However,  if the decision  to convert  was made by the shareholders  and the Zak.ah was not paid  for the previous fi nancial periods, the shareholders are obliged to pay Zakah  for these periods.  They must take into account that they are obliged to pay Zakah even if the revenues and the money earned  are impermissible  because the shareholders  are obliged in the first place to dispose of all accrued interest and  impermissible  earnings.  So,  the payment  of Zakah is  part of the obligation to dispose of impermissible  earnings and interest.

12.  Date of Issuance  of the Standard

This Standard  was issued on 4 Rabi' I,  1424  A.H,  corresponding to 16
May 2002 A.D.




















160





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah  Standard  on Conversion  of a Conventional to an Islamic bank was adopted by the Shari'ah Board in its meeting No  (8)  held in Al• Madinah Al-Munawwarah on 28 Safar-4 Rab~' I,  1423 A.H.,, corresponding to 11-16 May 2002 A.D.











































161





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its  meeting No.  (5)  held in Makkah Al-Mukarrarnah  on 8-12  Ramadan
1421  A.H., corresponding to 4-8 December  2000 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board decided  to  give  priority   to  the  preparation   of a  Sharf'ah  Standard   on Conversion  of a Conventional  bank to an Islamic Bank.

On Monday  29 Ramadan   1421   A.H.,  corresponding to  25 December
2000 A.D.,  a Shari'ah  consultant  was  commissioned to  prepare  a juristic study and an exposure  draft.

In its  meeting held in Bahrain on  15-16  Safar  1422  A.H.,  corresponding to 9-10 May 200 l A.D., the Shari'ah Studies  Committee  discussed the juristic study  and  made  certain  amendments  to  it.  The committee  also discussed the exposure  draft of the Standard  in its  meeting No.  (IO)  held  in Bahrain on 14 Rabi' I,  1422 A.H., corresponding  to 6 June 2001  A.D., and asked the consultant to make some amendments  in light cf the comments  made by the members.

In its meeting No. (1) held in Jordan on 17 Jumada II, 1422 A.H., corresponding  to  5  September  2001   A.D,  the Shari'ah  Studies  Committee
discussed the exposure draft am made some relevant amendments.

The  revised   exposure  draft   of the   standard   was  presented   to  the
Shari'ah  Board in its meeting  No.  (7)  held  in Makkah  Al-Mukarramah on
9-13  Ramadan   1422  A.H.,  corresponding to 24-28 November  2001  A.D. The  Shari'ah  Board  made  further  amendments  to  the  exposure  draft of the standard   and  decided  that  it  should  be distributed to specialists  and interested  parties  in order  to obtain  their  comments and  discuss  them  in
a public hearing.



162





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank

A public  hearing  was held  in  Bahrain  on  29  -20  Dhul-Hajjah   1422
A.H., corresponding to 2-3 February  2002 A.D..  The public  hearing was attended  by more  than  30  participants  representing central  Institutions, Institutions,  accounting   firms,  Shari'ah  scholars,  academics  and  others who  are interested  in this  field. The  members  responded  to the  written
comments  that were sent prior  to the public hearing as  well as to the oral
comments  that were expressed in the public hearing.

The Shari'ah Standards  Committee  in its meeting  held on 21-22 Dhul• Hajjah 1422  A.H.,  corresponding to 6-7 March 2002 A.D.,  in the Kingdom of Bahrain  discussed  the comments  made  about  the  exposure  draft.  The Committee  made the necessary  amendments,  which  it deemed  necessary in light of both  the discussions  that took place in the public hearing,  and the written  comments  that were received.

The  Shari'ah  Board  in its  meeting  No.  (8)  held  on  28 Safar  - 4 Rabi' I,  1423 A.H,,  corresponding to  11-16  May 2002 A.D,  in Al-Madinah  Al• Munawwarah  discussed the  amendments made  by the Shari'ah  Standards Committee, and made the necessary amendments,  which it deemed necessary. Some  paragraphs  of the  standard   were  adopted  by  the  unanimous  vote of the  members  of the  Shari'ah  Board,  while the  other  paragraphs   were adopted  by the majority  vote of the members,  as recorded  in the minutes of the Shari'ah Board.























163





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Gradual  Clearance  of Non-Permissible  Previous Transactions
The basis for the permissibility  of gradual clearance of non-permissible previous transactions  due to necessity or need and in accordance  with the rules  ofShari'ah is  because it is not feasible  for the converting  bank to clear all  non-permissible   transactions   immediately.  Therefore,  the  bank must dispose of the effects ofi impermissible  transactions  because this  is  feasible.

Necessary  Procedures  and  Mechanisms for Conversion
Since the realisation of the conversion  is dependent on the procedures and mechanisms mentioned in this standard, these procedures and mechanisms thus become permissible or in certain circumstances their use becomes obligatory when the conversion will not be realised without applying these procedures  and mechanisms.  This is because conversion is  obligatory,  and if
an obligation can be realised only by means of a particular way or tool,  then the use of such a tool also becomes an obligation.

Providing Banking Services

The basis for the permissibility of providing banking services that are  not related to giving  loans  on an interest-bearing  basis is  that such  an operation is a practical application  of ljarah and an agency contract with remuneration. If providing these services involves Riba then the operation becomes impermissible as it is  a Riba-based transaction  that is  prohibited by Shari'ah.
Attracting Investments
The conversion necessitates doing away with the conventional methods of attracting investment funds such as interest-bearing  deposits,  which should be replaced by the application of Mudarabah  and Musharakah contracts  or acting as  an investment  agent. The basis for the  impermissibility  of  using conventional   methods   of attracting   investments   is  the  Saying  of Allah,



164





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic  Bank

the  Exalted:  {"But  Allah  has permitted  trade  and forbidden  usury"}. The  basis for  terminating   all previous   impermissible  transactions   is  the Saying  of Allah,  the Exalted:  {"Give  up what  remains  of your demand for
usury"}.  Also,  a number  of Shari'ah  boards  have issued resolutions  for the
treatment  of pre-conversion  liabilities  that  involve  payment  of interest  by using Shari'ah acceptable instruments and the conversion of interest-based bonds  to  Islamic certificates  and  shares."  The  Fiqh  Academy under  the auspices  of the Muslim World League has issued a resolution confirming the permissibility ofTawarruq (which  is  one of the instruments  that can be used to acquire liquidity).6

Investment of Funds
The basis for the rule that the bank must cease investing through making loans and receiving interest  is  that this is  Riba and paying or receiving Riba is  prohibited.
■   The basis for the alternatives to interest-based  transactions  provided in this standard  is the authorities  that are mentioned  for each investment instrument in details in the Figh books"and  the Shari'ah  Standards.
Treatment of Impermissible Rights of  the Bank  before  the Decision  to
Convert
• The basis for  not  obliging  the  bank  to  dispose  of impermissible   in• tangible assets from the previous  financial period,  i.e.  before  the year of conversion, is because the management  of the bank cannot  change rights originating  in the previous fi nancial  period,  as the responsibili• ty and authority  for doing  so ends at the end of the previous  fi nancial period.  As for the shareholders  (the  owners),  they are obliged person-

(2)  [AI-Baqarah  (The Cow):  275]. (3)  [AI-Baqarah  (The Cow):  278].
(4)  "Qararat  A!Hay 'ah  AI-Shar'iyyah  Li Sharikat   Al Rahr:  Fatwa  No.  (106  and 200);
Fatawa  Nadwat Al  Baraka"  [IH:  6];  "Fatwa  Hay 'at Al-Fatwa  Wa Al-Raqabah  Al•
Shar'iyyah Ii Bayt Al-Tamwil AI-Kuwaytr" No. (415).
(5)  "Qararat Majma' AL-Fiah Al-Islami AL-Tabf' Li Rabitat Al-'Alam Al-Islami", the session
held in 1419  A.H.
(6)  See: Chapters on Mudarabah, partnerships, agency contract, sales, ljarah, etc. in different
Fiah boaks and also the Sharf'ah  rules for investment  and financing  instrument issued
by Accounting  and Auditing  Organisation  for  Islamic Financial  Institutions.



165





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank

ally to dispose  of any dividends  from  non-permissible  earnings  that were distributed  to them,  because  the  responsibility  of shareholders remains  even after  termination  of the responsibility  of the  manage• ment at the end of the financial  period,  ie.  the end of financial  period does exonerate  shareholders  from responsibility.
• The basis for allowing the bank to keep impermissible earnings and in• come of doubtful permissibility earned on the basis  of an interpretation of a person who is  qualified to perform Ijtihad on issues  that are subject to personal juristic interpretation and the juristic position of an authorita• tive School of~Shari'ah, etc.,, is that the Shari'ah validates actions that occur on the basis  of an interpretation  that one believes to be valid until such an interpretation  is  proved incorrect. The scholars are unanimous  that in times of social unrest due to the actions of insurgents  who believe in their cause by interpretation  or ljtihad to the effect  that they have a right to do so,  the insurgents  are entitled  to items of property  they acquire during this time,  even  if they realise later  that they were wrong and end
their act of insurgence."
The  basis   for destroying  the  bank's non-permissible   tangible  assets in the possession  of others before the year of conversion  is  that these assets are worthless  by Shari'ah  Standards  since they are impermissible. This  is  because disposing  of a prohibited  thing is  an obligation  as in the  case when  the  verse that  prohibited  liquor  was revealed  people discharged  the wine that was in their  possession.
Treatment  of Non-Permissible Liabilities  of the Bank before the Decision
to Convert
■   The basis for the rule that the bank  should  refrain from paying inter• est  after the conversion  is  because such interest is  not,  by the Shari'ah Standard,  a valid  debt  that  should  be honoured.  Again,  repentance through conversion necessitates refraining from prohibited acts in• cluding payment  of interest.  The principle  of necessity is  the basis  for allowing payment  of interest if the bank could not ref rain  from doing


(7) See Ibn  Qudamah,  A1Maughn" [12: 250-251],  Hajr publication, 2 edition 1413  A.H., edited  by Abdullah  Al Turki and Abdul-Fattah  Al-Hulw.



166





Shari'ah  Standard No.  (6):  Conversion of a Conventional Bank to an Islamic Bank

so because of lack of legal protection and the possibility that the bank may be subject to punishment that may prevent the avoidance of pay• ing interest. The payment of interest due to necessity is  supported by saying of Allah,  the Exalted:  {"Whoever disbelieved in Allah after his belief, except him who is forced thereto and whose heart is at rest with Faith.."" and the saying of the Prophet (peace be upon him):  "Verily, Allah,  the Exalted, Has forgiven  my ummah those act done by mistake, forgetfulness and compulsion"."
The basis for  making a distinction between the principal loan  and in• terest is  because the loan contracts per se  are valid.  It is  the  interest associated with the loan that is  forbidden. This  is the view of the Hanafi jurists who say that the loan contract itself is valid  and the condition  to pay interest is void.   Again, the basis for this ruling is  the legal maxim that says acts of Muslims must be deemed valid as far as possible even if their acts are based on a non-preferable juristic view.(
■  The  basis  for the  requirement  that  the outside  buyer interested  in converting the conventional bank should  exert all possible  effort  to exclude impermissible  rights  is  that  the payment  of interest  is   the responsibility of the seller.  Such  interest  would  have no bearing on the buyer of the bank as  the seller's  right  to receive  such interest  can be taken into account in computing  the price to be paid for the bank. If the buyer is  unable to convince the seller in this  respect,  the principle of necessity becomes applicable  with  regard to  payment of interest. The basis for extinguishing Riba-based loans  as soon  as possible even if such  an act will impose   on the buyer the  need to suggest to  the creditor/s early payment of these loans for a discount is the principle of Da' Wa Ta'ijjal(discount for acceleration of payment) that was endorsed by the resolution of International Islamic Fiqh Academy provided the discount was not agreed upon earlier

(8)  [AI-Nahl  (The  Bees):  106].
(9)  The Hadith is related by  bn Majah, "Sunan Ibn Majah" [I:  695]. (10)  See Al- Sarakhsi,  Al-Mabst [12:  25-26],  Dar AI-Ma'rifih.
(11)  See lbn AI-Humam,  "Fath Al- Qadir" [9:  114],  Dar Al-Fikr;  AlSarakhsi,  Al-Mabsut"
[7:  86];  AI-Kasani,  "Bada 'r' AI-Sana'i",  [3:  79],  [4:  5],   [7:  149  and 177],  (Dar A•
Kutub AI-'Ilmiyyah).
(12)  International Islamic  Fiqh Academy  Resolution No. 64 (2/7).



167





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank

The basis for  requiring  that the purchaser accelerate the redemption  of all impermissible  mortgages attached to the assets of the bank is because Riba is  prohibited;  hence,  securing  payment  of Riba by personal  guar•
antees or mortgages  is  also prohibited.  It must be noted  that the grave•
ness of securing  Riba by personal  guarantee  is  greater than  graveness of securing  Riba by writing  and attestation, which were mentioned  in the saying of the Prophet  (peace be  upon  him):  "Allah  curses  the  one  who take (earn)  Riba,  the  one  who gives  it,  the  one  who  scribe  it and  the two witnesses" 0
Treatment of Impermissible Tangible Assets Acquired by the Bank Before
the Decision  to Convert
• The  basis for destroying the existing tangible  assets  of the bank  after conversion  has already been explained. The basis for donating to char• ity receivables  earned  from  trading  in such  assets  has also  been  ex• plained  earlier.  The basis for transforming the locations that were used for impermissible  services to locations  for  permissible services  is  that the prohibition does not concern  tbe location itself rather  the prohibi• tion relates to the use of tbe location.
Disposal of Impermissible Rights
■  The basis  for the requirement that impermissible earnings  be donated to charity is that these revenues are not permissible  for the person  who earns  them.  This  is  evidenced  by the  order  of the  Prophet  (peace be upon  him) that the usurped goat be given to war prisoners.9
The basis  for  indicating  cbarity  as  a way of disposing  of impermissi•
ble  earnings  is that by transferring the ownership  of these earnings,  the characterisation  of probibition  in respect  to these  earnings  is  cbanged and they become  permissible  for  the beneficiary. Again,  a thing which is  probibited  for one person  is  not  necessarily  prohibited  for another person, ie. when it is  prohibited for one,  it may be permissible  for other.

(13)  The Hadith   has  been related  by   Muslim in  his   "Sahih"  [3:   1219],  verified  by
Muhammad Fu'ad Abdul-Baqi, Dar  Ihya Al-Turath Al'Arabi.
(14)  The Hadith has been related by Al-Daraqutni,  "Sunan Al-Daraqutnt"  [4:  285];  and
"NaN AI-Awtar" [9:  18].



168





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank

The International  Islamic Fiqh Academy has issued  a resolution  in sup•
port of this ruling.!"
• The basis  for allowing delay in disposal of non-permissible  earnings  if such disposal will lead  a total breakdown of the activities  of the bank or its  bankruptcy  is  that the  Fuqaha were of the view that a repentant  may use impermissible earnings to cover his unavoidable needs. However, the
Institution  is  not entitled to benefit whatsoever, i.e. directly or indirectly, from the earnings  that must be disposed of. This is because such benefit adds value to the asset of the Institution.
The channels  for disposing of impermissible  earnings include, as well as those mentioned  in this standard, all other channels of  disposal that the Shari'ah  Supervisory Board of each Institution  will regard as appropriate channels for disposal of impermissible  earnings.
































(15)  International  Islamic  Fiqh Academy Resolution No.  13 (1/3).



169


























