Shari'ah Standard No. (8)



Murabahah

(Revised Standard)




















This  standard was previously  issued by  the title  "Shari'ah Rules for Investment  and Financing Instruments No. (1) Murabahah  to the Purchase Orderer. It is reissued as a Sharf'ah standard  based on the resolution  of the Shari'ah Board to reformat all Shari'ah Rules in the form of Shari'ah Standards.












Contents


Subject                                                                                            Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        200
I.  Scope  of the Standard  ..........sos.so.so.so.so.oso.sos.o.so.o.sos.so.o.....      200
2.  Procedures Prior to the Contract of Murabahah ................        200
3.  Acquisition  of Title  to,  and  Possession  of,  the  Asset  by  the
Institution or Its Agent .......................so..........o...o...o........so...........      206
4.  Conclusion  of  a Murabahah  Contract...................................................         210

5.  Guarantees  and Treatment ofMurabahah  Receivables...............        212
6.  Date of Issuance  of the Standard.......................................................        214
Adoption of the Standard........»»sssssssssssssssssssss··ssss··sssssss··sssssss·rs.,,         215

Appendices
Appendix  (a)  Notice from Institution's Customer  af Its Performance of Purchasing  Asset or Good  As Agent for Institution,  and af Its Offer  to Purchase Item  from  Institution  According
to Contract of Murabahah  .......................a....a.....s........      216
Appendix  (b):  Notice  of Acceptance  by  Institution  of Customer's  Offer to Purchase  Asset or Good to Be Acquired, and af selling
item by Institution  to Customer...........................................        217
Appendix  (c):   Brief History  of the Preparation  af the Standard...............        218
Appendix (d):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard......................................        221

Appendix (e):   Definitions...............................................................................        230














197








IN  THE NAME OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all  the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all  his companions





Preface


The purpose of this standard  is  to explain  the Shari'ah  basis and rules for a Murabahah transaction,  the stages cf this transaction beginning from the promise to transferring ownership of the goods to the customer,  and the Shari'ah  requirements  that  need to be observed  by Islamic  financial Institutions.G






























(2) The  word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here  to refer,  in short,  to  Islamic  financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



199





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This  standard  covers the Murabahah transaction and its  various  stages, the issues relating to guarantees  before concluding  a Murabahah  deal such as promise,  Hamish  Jiddiyyah (security  deposit)  and  issues  relating  to guarantees  for recovery of the debt created by the Murabahah  transaction.

This standard  does not cover deferred payment sales that  take place on a basis other  than  that  of Murabahah.  It also does not cover other  trust and bargaining sales.

2. Procedures Prior  to the Contract of Murabahah

2/1  The customer's expression  of his wish to acquire an item  through the Institution

2/1/1  The  Institution  may  purchase   the  item  only  in  response  to its customer's wish and application, as long as this practice  is compatible  with the Shari'ah  precepts  for the contract  of sale.

2/1/2  With  due consideration to item 2/2/3,  it is  permissible for the customer  to request  the Institution  to purchase  the item  from a particular  source of supply. However, the Institution is entitled to decline to carry out the transaction if the customer  refuses offers  from  other  sources  of supply that  are  more  suitable  for the Institution.

2/1/3  The  customer's  wish to  acquire  the  item  does  not  constitute a promise  or commitment  except when  it has been  expressed in due  form.  It  is  permissible  to prepare  a single set of docu• mentation  to  be signed  by  the customer  and to  include  both the customer's  stated  wish that the Institution should  buy the item from the supplier and a promise  to buy the item from the Institution.  It is  permissible  for  the customer  to prepare  such





Shari'ah Standard   No (8):  Murabahah

a document,  or it may be  a standard  application  form  prepared
by the Institution to be signed by the customer

2/1/4 The customer  may obtain statement  ct prices from the supplier whether  they are addressed  to the customer  by name  [specific offer],  or with  no  reference  to  any named  customer   [general offer]. In the latter case,  the statement is  considered as an in• vitation to negotiate,  and not as an offer of sale.  It is  preferable that the invoice should be addressed  to the Institution so as to include an offer of sale from the supplier effective up to the end of a specified period.  The contract  of sale is  deemed concluded
once acceptance comes from the Institution.

2/2 The position  of the Institution in respect  to the application  of
the customer  for Murabahah

2/2/1  When  there is  acceptance by the customer of an offer from the supplier that is either addressed to him personally, or that has no addressee, then the sale is concluded with the customer and so it is  not permissible for the Institution  to carry out Murabahah  on the same item.

2/2/2 It is  essential  to  exclude  any  prior  contractual  relationship between  the customer who  is  the purchase orderer and  the original  supplier   of the  item  ordered,  if any. regarding the supply;  of the  item.   It is  a requirement  of Murabahah  that the  transaction between  the two parties must  genuinely, not fictitiously,  exclude  any prior  contractual relationship.

It is not permissible  to assign a contract that has been executed between  the customer  and the supplier ct the ordered  item  to the Institution.
2/2/3  The  Institution  must  ensure  that  the  party from  whom  the item  is  bought   is  a third   party  other  than  customer   or  his agent.  For example,  it  is  not permitted  for a customer to sell an ordered item to the Institution  and then repurchase it through
a Murabahah transaction.  Nor may; the party that is supplying
the item  be wholly, or by,  way,  of majority  [more  than  50%],



201





Shari'ah  Standard No (8)  Murabahah

owned  by the customer.  If a sale transaction takes place  and later  on it  is discovered  that  it was carried  out  through   such practices,  this would  render  the transaction void as it is tan• tamount to 'Inah.

2/2/4 If the  supplier  (owner)  of the  item  has  a blood  relationship or marital  relationship  with the customer, then the Institution shall verify,  before  entering  into Murabahah,  that  the  sale is not fictitious  and not a stratagem  for the sale of 'Inah.
2/2/5  It is not permissible for the Institution  and the customer to agree to form a Musharakah  in a project or a specified deal together with  a promise  from  one of them  to buy the  other's  share  in Musharakah  by means  of Mura bah ah on either spot or deferred payment  terms.  However,  it  is  permissible  for  one partner  to promise to purchase  the other's share in Musharakah  at market price or at a price to be agreed upon at the time of sale provided a new  contract is  drawn  up.  This  sale may be on spot  or on deferred payment terms.

2/2/6  It is not  permitted to carry out a Murabahah on deferred payment terms where the asset involved is gold,  silver or currencies.

2/2/7 It is  also impermissible to issue negotiable  Sukuk  where  the underlying asset consists of Murabahah receivables  or other receivables  only.

2/2/8  Likewise,  it is  not permitted  to renew a Murabahah contract  on the same commodity  that was the subject matter  of a previous Murabahah  contract with the same customer,  i.e.  to refinance the transaction.
2/3  The promise from  the customer

2/3/1  It is not permissible  that the document of promise  to purchase (signed  by the customer)   should  include  a bilateral promise which   is   binding   on  both  parties   (the  Institution  and the customer).



202





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah

2/3/2  The customer's  promise  to purchase,  and the related contrac• tual framework,  are not integral  to a Murabahah transaction, but  are intended  to provide  assurance  that  the customer  will complete  the transaction after the item  has been  acquired  by the Institution. Ifthe Institution has other opportunities to sell the item, then  it may not need  such a promise  or contractual framework.

2/3/3  A bilateral  promise  between  the customer and the Institution is  permissible only if there  is  an option  to cancel the promise which  may be exercised either by both  promisors  or by either one of them.

2/3/4  It is  permissible  for  the  Institution  and  the  customer,  after the  latter  has  given  a promise   but  before  the  execution   of the  Murabahah,  to agree  to  revise  the  terms  of the  promise whether with respect  to the deferment of payment, the mark• up or other terms. The terms ct the promise  cannot  be revised except by mutual  consent  by both  parties.

2/3/5  It   is  permissible  for the  Institution  to purchase  the item from a supplier on a "sale or return" basis, i.e., with the option to return it within a specified period. Ifthe customer then does not purchase the item, the Institution  is able  to return it to the supplier within the specified period on the basis of the conditional  option  that is established in Shari'ah. The option between the Institution and the supplier does not expire by the mere presentation of the item to the customer, but it expires by virtue of the actual sale to the customer.
It is advisable to stipulate in a stipulated option to revoke (khiyar al•
Sha rt) that the mere offer by the purchaser for the sale of the item to a third party does not invalidate the option.
2/4 Commissions and expenses

2/4/1  It is not permissible for the Institution to receive a commitment fee from the customer.



203





Shari'ah  Standard No (8)  Murabahah

2/4/2  It is not  permissible  for  the  Institution  to  receive  a fee for
providing a credit  facility.

2/4/3 The  expenses   of preparing the  documents of the  contract between the Institutions and the customer  are to be borne evenly by the two parties  (the  Institution  and the customer), provided they do not agree that the expenses  are to be borne  wholly by one party,  and provided  those expenses are proportional to the
actual amount  rt work involved,  so that they do not implicitly
include a commitment  fee or a facility fee.

2/4/4  If the Murabahah is carried  out by means of syndicated  frnanc• ing,  the Institution  which  acts as the arranger  of the syndicate is  entitled  to an arrangement fee  to be paid by the participants in the syndicate.

2/4/5  It is permissible  for the Institution  to receive a fee for a feasibility study that  it  undertakes in case such study is  requested  by the customer  and for the  benefit  thereof  and  the customer  agrees to pay the fe thereof.  The customer  is  entitled  to a copy of the study if he so requires.

2/5  Guarantees related to the commencement of the  transaction

2/5/1  It is permissible  for the Institution  to obtain from the customer (the purchase  orderer)  a guarantee (performance deed) regard• ing the  good  performance  by  the  supplier  of his  contractual obligations  towards the Institution  in his personal  capacity and not  in his  capacity  as purchase  orderer  or in his capacity  as an agent of the Institution.  Hence,  if the Murabahah  contract is  not executed, his guarantee  would still be valid  This guaran• tee is required  only in cases where the customer  has suggested a particular  source  ci supply  for the  item  that  is  the  subject matter  of the Murabahah contract.

As a consequence  of this guarantee,  the  customer  shall make good  any  damage  suffered  by  the  Institution  due to failure of the  supplier  to provide  good  performance   of his contractual obligations. These obligations concern meeting the specification





Shari'ah  Standard No (8)  Murabahah

of the  item  to be  supplied  and  the  exercise  of diligence  in executing  the contract,  non-observance of which may result in the loss  of the Institution's  time  and efforts  or property,  or in a legal  dispute and damage claims.

2/5/2  It is not permitted to impose on a customer who is the purchase orderer a guarantee regarding  hazards  that may affect the item such as damage  and  destruction during a period  of shipment or storage.

2/5/3  It is  permissible   for  the Institution,  in the  case of a binding promise  by the customer,  to take  a sum  of money  as Hamish Jiddiyyah  (security deposit). This is to be paid by the customer  at the request of the Institution, both asan indication of the financial capacity of the customer  and to ensure the compensation of any damage to the Institution  arising fram a breach by the customer of his binding promise. Having taken this Hamish Jiddiyyah, the Institution  need  not  to demand   compensation  for damage  as this may be charged  against the Hamish Jiddiyyah  The Hamish Jiddiyyah  is  not  considered   as 'Arboun  (Earnest Money).  The amount  of money deposited by the customer  as security for his commitment  can be  either held,  if the  customer   permits  the Institution to invest  it,  as an investment trust  on  the  basis of Mudarabah  between the customer  and the Institution, ex held in a current account  at  the discretion of the customer.

2/5/4  In the case of the  customer's   breach  of his  binding  promise, the Institution is  not  permitted to retain  Hamish Jiddiyyah as such. Instead, the Institution's rights are limited to deducting  the amount  of the actual damage  incurred as a result of the breach,
namely  the difference  between  the cost of the  item borne  the Institution  and  the price  at which  the  item is  sold to a third party.  The  actual  damage  to  the  Institution  may  not  include the loss  of its mark-up in  the Murabahah transaction,  that  is, its  opportunity loss.



205





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah

2/5/5 When the customer  has fulfilled his promise  and executed the contract  of Murabahah,  the Institution   must  refund  Hamish Jiddiyyah  to  the  customer.  The  Institution   is   not  entitled  to receive any amount  out of Hamish Jiddiyyah except in the case of breach of promise as laid down in item 2/5/3. It is permissible for the Institution  to agree with the customer  that the amount of Hamish Jiddiyyah  will be deducted  from the price payable by the customer  pursuant  to the contract  of Murabahah.

2/5/6 It is permissible for the Institution to take 'Arboun  (Earnest Mon• ey)  upon conclusion cf the Murabahah  sale with the customer. This  may not be done during the contractual  stage at which the customer has given his promise to purchase.  In the event that the customer  revokes the contract in an 'Arboun-based transaction, it  is  prefierable  that  the Institution,  after deducting  the actual damage it incurs,  refunds the remaining  amount  of 'Arboun  to the customer. The damage in this context means the difference between the cost of the item  borne the Institution and the price at which  the item  is sold  to a third party.

3.  Acquisition  of Title to,  and  Possession  of,  the Asset by the Institution or Its Agent
3/1  The acquisition of the asset or good by the Institution prior to its sale by means  of Murabahah

3/1/1  The Institution  shall not sell any item in a Murabahah  transac• tion before it acquires such item. Hence, it is not valid for the In• stitution to conclude a Murabahah sale with the customer before the  Institution  concludes  a urchase  contract  with the supplier di the  item  the subject matter cf the Murabahah  and before it acquires actual or constructive  possession of such items, which can be achieved when the supplier gives the Institution  control over the item  or the documents  that represent possession there• of [see  items  3/2/1-3/2/4].  Likewise, the Murabahah  is  consid• ered void in case the contract with  the supplier is  void, because





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah

in this case the Institution  would fail to acquire complete title to
the item.

3/1/2  It is  permitted that the contract between the Institution and the supplier be completed  by means  ofa meeting of the two parties to discuss the det ils, at which point the contract may be executed. Likewise,  it is permitted that the contract be completed through exchanging of the notices  of; offer and acceptance,  either  in writing  or by any form of modern communication customarily practiced according to known principles.

3/1/3  The original  principle  is  that the Institution  itself purchases the item  directly from the supplier.  However,  it is  permissible for the Institution  to carry out the purchase by authorizing an agent,  other  than  the purchase  orderer,  to execute the purchase; and the customer (the purchase orderer) should not be appointed to act  as an agent except in case of a dire need. Furthermore,  the  agent must  not sell the  item  to  himself. Rather, the Institution must first acquire title of the item and then sell it to the agent.  In such a case,  the provisions of; item
3/1/5  should be observed.

3/1/4  In cases when the customer is  authorized to purchase the item as the  Institution's   agent,  it  is  obligatory   to  adopt procedures which would ensure that certain conditions are observed.  These conditions include:
a) the Institution itself must pay the supplier,  and not pay the price  of the item into the account of the customer as agent, whenever possible.
b) the Institution should obtain from the supplier the documents that confirm that a sale has taken place.

3/1/5  It is  obligatory to separate the two  liabilities  of risk attaching to the purchased item,  namely the  liability of the Institution and the liability of the  customer   as agent of the Institution. This  is  achieved  by having an interval in  time  between the



207





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah

performance   f the  agency  contract   and  the  execution   of the  contract  of Murabahah,  as  indicated   in  the  customer's notice  of performance  of the  agency contract  to acquire  the item  and offer to purchase  the item  by means  of Murabahah [see   Appendix   (a)]  followed   by  the  institution's   notice  of its  acceptance  of the  customer's  offer  t purchase  and  the execution  f the Murabahah  sale contract  [see  Appendix  (b)].

3/1/6 The  original  principle  is  that  all documents  and  contracts concerned with the execution  of the sale of the item  must be in the name of the Institution  and not in that of the customer,
unless the latter acts as the Institution's agent in acquiring the item.
3/1/7 I is permissible,  at the  time  when  the  Institution   appoints someone  as its agent for the acquisition of the item, that the two parties  agree to  authorize  the  agent to  carry  out  the acquisi• tion of the item as agent,  without disclosing the existence of the agency agreement.  In this  case,  the agent will act  as principal in dealing with other parties, and will undertake  the purchase directly in his name but on behalf of the Institution  as principal. However,  it  is preferable  that the agent's role  be disclosed.
3/2 The  Institution's taking  possession of the asset  or good,  prior  to its sale by Murabahah

3/2/1  I is  obligatory   that  the  Institution's   actual  or constructive possession  of the  item  be ascertained  before  its sale to  the customer  on the basis of Murabahah.

3/2/2 The  condition  that  possession  of the  item  must  be taken  by the  Institution   (before  its onward  sale to  the  customer)   has a specific purpose:  that the Institution  must assume the risk of the item  it intends  to sell.  This means  that the item must move from  the responsibility  of the supplier  to the  responsibility  of the Institution.  Similarly, it is obligatory that the point when the risk of the item is passed on by the Institution  to the customer



208





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah

be clearly identified,  with reference  to the stages in which  the item  is  transferred from  one party to another.

3/2/3 The  forms  of taking  delivery  or possession  of items  differ according  to their  nature  and different trade  customs.  Taking possession  may be actual in the case of the physical delivery or transportation to the acquirer or its  agent, but may also take place constructively  by  placing of the item  at the acquirer's  disposal so as to enable him to deal with  it at his will, even though  no physical delivery has taken  place.  Taking  possession  of an item of real  property  may also take place by means  of the property being vacated  and  its  being  placed  at the  acquirer's  disposal; if the latter  is  not able  to have disposal  of the purchased  item, then the vacation of the property  is  not considered as conveying possession.  In the case of moveable assets, possession will take place in accordance  with the nature of the asset.

3/2/4  The receipt of a bill of lading by the Institution  or its agent, when purchasing goods on the  international  market,  is  considered  as constructive possession. The same would apply to the Institution's receipt of certificates of storage issued  by warehouses  following appropriate and reliable formalities.

3/2/5  The original  principle  is  that the Institution  itself must receive the  item from the  premises  of the  supplier  or from  a location that  is  specified  in the delivery conditions.  The  responsibility for the risk attached  to the item is  transf 2rred to the Institution upon its taking possession  of the item. However, it is permissible for the Institution to authorize another  party to take delivery of the item on its  behalf.

3/2/6 As  the  Institution  is   the   owner   of  the  subject   matter   of Murabahah its insurance  lies with the Institution  before selling it to the customer.  Any amount recovered  from  insurance  at this  stage  will belong  to  the  Institution  exclusively  and  the
customer  has  no  claim  to  it  even  if the  recovered   amount
exceeds the purchase price. The Institution  is entitled to include



209





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah

the expenses of insurance  in the Murabahah   cost price to be subsequently   added  to the  price  of Murabahah.   Insurance must be on the basis of Takaful whenever  possible.

3/2/7  Agency in carrying out the procedures  ct obtaining  insurance cover for the item  at the stage of the Institution's acquisition  of ownership  of the asset is permitted.  However,  it is  obligatory that the Institution  should bear the cost of insurance.

4. Conclusion  of a Murabahah Contract

4/1   It is not permitted  for the Institution  to consider that the contract of Murabahah  is automatically concluded by its mere taking possession of the asset.  Likewise,  the Institution  may not force a customer  who is  the  purchase  orderer  to  take  delivery  ct the  asset  and  pay the Murabahah  selling price,  if the  customer  refuses to  conclude  the Murabahah transaction.

4/2 The  Institution   is  entitled  to receive  compensation  for any actual damage it has incurred as a result of the customer's breach ct a binding promise.  The compensation  consists of the customer reimbursing the Institution  for any loss due to a difference between the price received by the Institution in selling the asset to a third  party and the original cost price paid by the Institution  to the supplier.
4/3 When  the  Institution  has  purchased  an asset for  a deferred  price, with the intention  that it will be sold on a Murabahah  basis,  then the Institution  is obliged to disclose to the customer that the asset is  pur• chased by the Institution  on deferred payment basis.  The Institution has the obligation to disclose to the customer, when concluding  the contract  ct sale, the details cf any expenses that it would include in determining  the cost. The Institution is  also entitled to include any expenses relating  to the item  if this  is  acceptable to the  customer. However,  if the Institution  failed to disclose any expenses, it is  not entitled  to include them  unless they  are customarily  considered  as normal expenses, such as transportation  expenses,  storage  expenses,
fees for letters  of credit and insurance  premiums.



210





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah

4/4 The Institution  is  not entitled to include in the base cost ct the item, for  the  purpose  of calculating  the  Murabahah   price,  any amounts other than  the direct expenses that are paid to a third  party. It is not permissible, for example, for the Institution  to add to the cost of the item  payments  made to its  own staff for their work,  and the like.

4/5  If the Institution has, even after the drawing  up of the Murabahah contract,  received  a discount   for  the  same  item  that  was sold  on Murabahah basis from  the supplier  of the item,  then  the customer
should benefit from that discount by a reduction af the total Murabahah
selling price in proportion to the discount.

4/6  It is an obligation that both the price of the item  and the Institution's profit on  the  Murabahah   transaction  be  fixed and  known  to  both parties  on the  signature  ct the  contract  of sale.  It  is  not permitted
under any circumstances  to subject the determination of the price  or the profit to unknown  variations  or variations  that are determinable in the future,  such as  by concluding  the sale  and making  the profit dependent  on the rate ofLIBOR that will prevail in the future. There is no objection to ref erring to any other known  indicators  during the promise  stage as a comfort indicator  to determine  the rate of profit, provided  that the determination of the Institution's  profit at the time ct concluding  the Mura bah ah is based on a certain  percentage  of the cost and is  not tied up with LIBOR or a time factor.
4/7 The Institution's profit mark-up in Murabahah must be known, and the mere mention of the total selling price is not sufficient. It is permissible that the profit be determined based on a lump  sum amount or a certain percentage of the cost price  only or of the cost price  plus  the expenses. This determination  is completed  by the agreement and mutual consent of the two parties.

4/8  It is permissible  to  agree on  the  payment  of the  price  of the  item under  Murabahah  either by short or long term  instalments, and the selling price of the asset becomes a debt that the customer is obligated to pay at  the time  agreed  upon.  It is  not permitted   subsequently  to demand  any  extra  payment  either  in  consideration   of extra  time



211





Shari'ah  Standard No (8)  Murabahah

given for payment  or for delay in payment  that  may be for a reason or no reason.
4/9  It is permissible  for  the  Institution   to  stipulate  in the  contract  of Murabahah a condition  that the Institution is free from responsibility for all or some of the defects of the asset, but not  from destruction caused  before   the  possession   of  the  customer   or  diminution   of
quantity  sold;  this  is  known  as Bay al-Bara'ah  (sale on as is basis).
In the case of stipulating  such a condition,  it is preferable  that  the Institution should  assign to the customer  the right of recourse  to the supplier  to obtain  compensation  for any def cts that are established, which  would  otherwise  be  recoverable by  the Institution from  the supplier.

4/10 The Institution shall be responsible  for pre-existing hidden  defects which appear after the conclusion  of the contract, unless it stipulates otherwise according  to item  10/4. However, it shall not be responsible for any new defects  (recent defects)  that arise after the conclusion of
the contract  and taking delivery by the customer.

4/11  The Institution  is entitled  to include,  as a condition of the contract, that  in  case  of the  customer's  refusal,  after  the  execution  of the Murabahah contract,  to take delivery  ct the asset at the prescribed time,  the Institution  could  revoke the  contract   or sell the  asset  to a third  party  on  behalf  of the  customer and  for his  account.  The Institution  could  then  recover  from  the  selling  price  the  amount due  to  it from  the  customer  under  the  contract,  and  would  have recourse   to  the  customer   for  the  balance  if that  price  were  not sufficient  to cover the amount  due to the customer.

5. Guarantees  and Treatment of Murabahah Receivables

5/1  It  is  permissible  for the Institution   to stipulate  to the customer  that instalments  may become due before their originally agreed due dates in case of the customer's  refusal or delay in paying  any instalment without  any valid reason  after the  lapse  of the time specified  in the
notice to be sent by the Institution to the customer  within a reasonable
period  of  time following the due date.



212





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah

5/2 The  Institution   should  ask  the  customer  to  provide  permissible security  in  the  contract  of Murabahah.  Among  other  things,  the Institution  may receive  a third  party guarantee  or the mortgagee  of the investment account of the customer or the mortgagee of any item of real or moveable property, or the mortgagee of the subject matter of the Murabahah  contract as a fiduciary mortgagee (or a registered charge),  either  without  taking  possession  of the  mortgageed  asset, or by taking possession  of the mortgageed  asset and then releasing the mortgagee progressively according to the percentage of the total payment  received.
5/3  It is permissible for the Institution  to require the customer to provide cheques or promissory  notes before the execution of the contract  of Murabahah,  as a guarantee  of the indebtedness  that  will be created after the  execution  of the contract.  This   is possible  on the written condition  that the Institution  is  not entitled to use these cheques or documents except on their  due dates.  The  requirement  to provide cheques as security is  not permissible in countries  where they could be presented  for payment before their due date.
5/4  It is  not permissible  to stipulate that the ownership  of the item  will not  be transferred  to  the  customer  until  the  full payment  of the selling price.  However,  it is  permissible to postpone  the registration of the asset in the customer's name as a guarantee of the full payment of the selling price. The Institution  may receive  authority  from  the customer to sell the asset in case the customer delays  payment of the selling price,  in which  case the Institution  should  issue  a counter• deed to the customer  to establish the latter's  right  to ownership.  If the Institution  sells the asset as  a result of the customer's failure to make a payment  of the selling price on its  due date, it must confine itself to recovering the amount  due to it and must return  the balance to the customer.
5/5   In the case of the Institution  receiving a mortgagee from the customer, the Institution  is  entitled to stipulate that the customer should make an assignment  to the Institution  to enable  it  to sell  the mortgageed



213





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah

asset for the purpose of recovering the amount due from the customer without recourse to the judiciary.

5/6  It is permissible   that the contract of Murabahah consists of an under• taking from the customer to pay an amount of money or a percentage of the  debt,  on  the basis of undertaking to donate it  in the event  of a delay on his part in paying instalments on their due date. The Shari'ah Supervisory Board of the Institution must have full knowledge that any such amount is  indeed spent on charitable causes,  and not for the ben• efit of the Institution itself.

5/7  It is not permissible to extend the date of payment of the debt in exchange for an additional  payment in case of rescheduling,  irrespectively  of whether the debtor is  solvent or insolvent.

5/8  When there is  default in payment by  the customer with regard to instalments  of the selling price that are due,  the amount due is  just the amount of the unpaid selling price. It  is not permissible for the Institution  to impose any additional  payment on the customer for the Institution's  benefit.  This  provision  is,  however,  subject to item
5/6.

5/9  It  is  permissible for the Institution  to give up  part of the selling price if the customer pays early, provided this  was not part of the contractual  agreement.

5/10 Ifthe customer wishes to pay in a currency different from Mura bah ah currency.,  it  is  permissible,  with the agreement of the Institution  at the  time of  payment on condition  that the payable  debt   is  paid in full or the amount agreed  to be  paid in  different  currency is  paid in full and no part of the currency; exchange  amount remains due. This  currency; exchange  may not be  stipulated  in the contract of Murabahah.

6. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 4 Rabi'  I, 1423 A.H., corresponding to  16 May
2002 A.D.



214





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah standard  for Murabahah  was adopted by the Shari'ah  Board in its  meeting No.  (4) held on 25-27 Safar 1421  A.H.,  corresponding  to 29-31
May 2000 A.D.

In its meeting No  (8)  held in Mecca on 28 Safar  - 4 Rabi' I,  1423 A.H., corresponding  to  11-16   May  2002  A.D.,   the  Shari'ah  Board  readopted a resolution  to reformat  the  Shari'ah  rules for  Murabahah  in the form  of a Shari'ah  standard.





































215





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah





Appendix  (A)
Notice from  Institutions Customer of Its Performance of Purchasing Asset or Good As Agent for Institution, and of Its Offer to Purchase Item from Institution According  to Contract of Murabahah



Notice from  the institution's customer  of its performance of the purchase of the asset or good as agent  for the institution:
From:  (The Institution's  customer  as agent)                . To        (The Institution)........
In the  performance  of my contract  of agency with you,  I  hereby inform you that I have purchased  the item  described below on your behalf and for your benefit. This item  is in my possession  on your behalf.
In accordance with my promise to you,  I hereby agree to purchase this item  from you for a total price of ...... ,  namely the cost price of
......  plus the mark-up  f .......

The payment  of this price will be in accordance with the following schedule  of instalments:







Please send the acceptance  in accordance  with this  offer.




216





Shari'ah  Standard No (8)  Murabahah





Appendix  (B)
Notice of Acceptance  by Institution of Customer's Offer to Purchase Asset or Good to Be Acquired,  and of selling  item by Institution  to Customer


Notice of the acceptance by the Institution of the customer's  offer to purchase the asset or good to be acquired:

From:  (The Institution)        .

To  (The  customer  as the Institution's  agent)..........

In  response   to  your  notice  dated   ..... ,    containing  your  offer  to purchase   the  item  described   below  which  is   owned  by  us,   we hereby  confirm  to you our  sale of the  item  to you at  a total  price of .....  comprising the cost price of . . . . .    plus the mark-up  of ..... ,  in accordance  with the conditions explained  in the general agreement to a contract ofMurabahah.

Please  send the acceptance in accordance with this offer.


















217





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah





Appendix (C)
Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (1) held on 11  Dhul-Hajjah  1419 A.H., corresponding to  27  February   1999 A.D.,  the  Sharf'ah Board  decided  to  give  priority  to the preparation of a Standard setting out the Shari'ah  rules for Murabahah.

On Tuesday 13  Dhul-Hajjah  1419 A.H., corresponding to 30 March 1999
A.D.,  the Fatwa and Arbitration  Committee  recommended to the Shari'ah Board the commissioning of a Shari'ah consultant  to prepare a juristic study and an exposure  draft of the Shari'ah Rules for Murabahah.

In its  meeting held  on  13-14  Rajab  1420  A.H.,  corresponding to 22•
23 October 1999  A.D.,  the Fatwa and  Arbitration  Committee discussed the  exposure  draft  of the  Sharf'ah  Rules  for Murabahah,  and  asked  the consultant to  make  the  amendments in light of the  comments  made  by the members.
The revised  exposure  draft  of the Sharf'ah  Rules was presented  to the
Shari'ah  Board  in  its meeting  No.  (2) held in Mecca  on  10-15  Ramadan
1420  A.H.,  corresponding  to  18-22  December  1999  A.D.  The  Shari'ah Board  made  further   amendments  to  the  exposure  draft  of the  Shari'ah Rules and decided  that it should  be distributed to specialists and interested parties  in order  to  obtain   their  comments  in  order  to  discuss  them  in a public  hearing.

A public hearing  was held in Bahrain on 29-30 Dhul-Hajjah  1421  A.H., corresponding  to  4-5  April  2000 A.D.  The  public  hearing  was attended by more than 30 participants representing central banks, institutions, accounting firms, Shari'ah scholars, academics and others who are interested in this  field.  The members  responded  to  the written  comments  that  were



218





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murababah

sent prior to the public hearing as well as to the oral comments  that were expressed in the public hearing.

The Shari'.ah Studies Committee and the Fatwa and Arbitration Committee held a joint meeting on 21-23 Muharram  1421  A.H.,  corresponding to 26-28
April  2000 A.D.,  to discuss the comments  made about the exposure draft
of the Shari'ah  Rules.  The joint meeting made the necessary amendments, which it deemed necessary in light of the discussions that took place  in the public hearing.

The Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. (4)  held on 25-27 Safar 1421 A.H., corresponding  to 29-31  May 2000 A.D., in  Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah discussed the amendments  made by the Shari'ah Studies Committee  and the Fatwa and Arbitration  Committee,  and made the necessary amendments, which  it deemed  necessary..  The  standard  was adopted  with the  name  cf
"Shari'ah   Rules for  the  Murabahah.   Some  paragraphs  were adopted  by
the unanimous  vote of the members  cf the Shari'ah Board, while the other paragraphs were adopted by the majority vote of the members,  as recorded in the minutes  of the Shari'ah  Board.

The Shari'ah  Board decided  in its  meeting No.  (7) held  in  Makkah Al
Mukarramah on 9-13 Ramadan 1422  A.H,  corresponding  24-28 November
2001  A.D.,  to pass a  resolution  to reformat  all Shari'ah  rules in a form cf
standards  and a committee was formed for this  purpose.

In its  meeting No.  (8) held  in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah  on 28 Safar
- 4 Rabi' I,   1423 A.H., corresponding to 11-16 May 2002 A.D, the Sharf'ah Board  adopted  the  reformatting  cf the Shari'ah  Rules for Investment  and Financing No.  (l)  on Murabahah  with the name of Shari'ah  Standard  No. (8)  on Murabahah.

The Shari'ah  Standards  Review Committee   reviewed  the standard  in its  meeting  held  in  Rabi'  II,   1433  A.H.,  corresponding  to  March  2012
A.D,,  in   the  State  cf Qatar,   and  proposed   after  deliberation   a   set  of
amendments (additions, deletions, and rephrasing) as deemed  necessary, and then  submitted  the proposed  amendments to the Shari'ah Board for approval  as it  deemed  necessary.



219





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah

In its  meeting  No.  (39) held in the  Kingdom  of Bahrain  on  13-15
Muharram   1435 A.H.,  corresponding  to 6-8 November  2014 A.D., the Sharf'ah  Board discussed  the proposed  amendments submitted  by  the Shari'ah  Standards  Review Committee.  After deliberation,  the Shari'ah Board  approved  the   necessary  amendments,  and  the  standard   was adopted in its current amended version.
















































220





Shari'ah  Standard  No (8):  Murabahah







Appendix  (D)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Preface on the Permissibility  of Murabahah

Definition of Murabahah

Murabahah  is   selling a commodity  as  per  the  purchasing  price  with a defined and agreed profit mark-up.  This mark-up  may be a percentage cf the selling price or a lump sum. This  transaction  may be concluded  either without a prior promise to buy, in which case it is  called an ordinary Mura• bahah, or with   a prior promise to buy submitted by a  person interested  in acquiring goods through the Institution,  in which case it  is  called a "banking Murabahah" ie.  Murabahah to the purchase orderer.  This transaction  is  one cf the trust-based  contracts that  depends  on transparency  as to  the actual purchasing price  or cost price in addition  to common expenses.

Permissibility of Murabahah

The authorities  for the permissibility  ofMurabahah are authorities on the permissibility  of sale.  Among  them is the saying of Allah, the exalted:
{"...Allah  has permitted  trade.'}.     Some  scholars  has  also  cited  to
support  the permissibility ofMurabahah  the saying  of Allah,  the Exalted:
{"It  is  no  crime for you  to seek the bounty of your Lord,"}"  arguing that  the bounty  mentioned   here  means  profit.  The  Murabahah   is  also analogous  to a form of sale called  Tawliy yah  (which  means to sell  as per the purchasing  price without  malting profit).  This is  because the Prophet (peace  be upon  him)  purchased  a she-camel  from Abu Bakr to use it as a transportation to immigrate  to Medina.  Abu Baler wanted  to give  it  to the Prophet  (peace  be upon  him) free of charge,  but the Prophet  refused

(3)  [AI-Baqarah  (The  Cow):  275]. (4)  [Al-Baqarah  (The  Cow):  198].



221





Shari'ah  Standard  No (8):  Murabahah

saying:  "I  will preferably  take  it at  the acquisition price".  The  majority  of
scholars agreed,  in principle,  on the permissibility of Murabahah.

Promise from  the Purchase  Orderer
• The  basis for the  permissibility  of responding  to the  application  of the customer   that  the  Institution   buys  the  commodity   from  a  particular supplier  is  because  such a demand  will not affect the acquisition  of the commodity  by the Institution, especially in view of the fact that this de• mand is not binding. 'The Institution  is entitled to acquire the commodity from  another  supplier  provided  the  commodity   complies  with  the  de• sired  specification.  The customer  may be forced to  fulfil his  obligation on the  basis of general  sources  of the  Qur 'an  and  Sunn ah that  require fulfilment of obligation  and undertaking.  The International  Fiqh Acade• my has issued a resolution  endorsing  a unilateral  binding  promise."° The same was adopted  in a fatwa for  Kuwait Finance  House,"  Qatar  Islamic Bank," and others.
• The basis  for   allowing  price  quotations   be submitted   in  the  name  of
customer  is  because such  an act has  no  contractual  effect  if there  is  no acceptance by the customer. The basis why it is preferred that the quotation be submitted  in the name of the Institution,  is to avoid  confusion and this
is  what was endorsed  by the Fatwas of Qatar Islamic  Bank,"and Kuwait
Finance House."
• The basis  for  not allowing a Murabahah  deal when the customer  accepts the deal directly from the supplier  is because,  by this, a sale  contract  has taken place between the customer and the supplier in which case the commodity  enters  into  ownership  of the customer.  This  ruling  will not be affected  whether  or not  the customer  has paid  the price.  This  is  be• cause payment  is  not a condition  for  the permissibility  and conclusion  of a contract  as payment of the price is  but a consequence  of a contract  and is  not principal requirement  or a condition  for regarding a contract valid.

(5)  International  Fiqh  Academy Resolution  No.  40-41  (2/5  and 3/5). (6)  Fatwa  No.  (49).
(7)  Fatwa  No.  (8). (8)  Fatwa  No.  (35). (9)  Fatwa  No.  (87).



222





Shari'ah  Standard No (8)  Murabahah

The basis for the requirement  that there must not be any contractual  com• mitment  between  the customer  and  the supplier  is to safeguard  against the contract  being a mere interest-based  financing.  Therefore,  the lack of any commitment between  the customer  and the supplier  is  a basic con•
dition  for the permissibility  of executing a Murabahah  by the Institution.
• The basis for the requirement  that the customer  must not have any (busi• ness)  connection  with the supplier is to avoid  involving in a 'Inah (sell and buy back)  transaction  that is  prohibited  by Sharl'ah.
The basis for the permissibility  that the supplier  may be a relative  of the customer or a husband or wife to the customer is because both parties have independent  legal  liability unless  it  has come to be that they are involved in a 'Inah transaction,  in which  case the transaction  is  prohibited.  This is to defeat  a potential  intentional  arrangement  to evade formalities  of the transaction.  The Fatwa of Kuwait Finance House supports this.(
The basis for not allowing a partner to promise to buy the shares of another partner  on a Murabahah basis is because this will lead to the buyer guaran• teeing the share of other partner,  which is  Riha.
The basis for not allowing dealings in gold, silver and currencies  on de• ferred  Murabahah basis is  the saying of the Prophet,  peace be upon  him, in respect  to exchange of gold with silver that such exchange take place "hand  to  hand"G    i.e.,  without  delay  in delivery, and  the  rules  of  cur• rencies are subsumed  under  the ruling for gold  and silver.  This ruling is
endorsed  by the resolution  of the International  Fiah  Academy
The  basis  for  the  prohibition   of  Murabahah  tradable  securities  or refi nancing  of a Murabahah transaction is because  these  fall under  the heading  of sale of debt  that  is prohibited  by Shari'ah.
The basis for not allowing a bilateral binding promise is  because it amounts to
a contract prior to acquisition of the item to be sold.  'The  International  Fiqh
Academy has issued  a resolution in this respect.3
• The basis for the permissibility of the agreement to amend the terms of the
promise is  because a promise is not a contract and as such the amendment

(10) Fatwa No.  (55).
(1H)  The Hadith has been related by Muslim   in his  "Sahih".
( 12)  International  Fiah Academy Resolution  No.  63 (1/7).
( 13)   International Fiah Academy Resolution  No. 41(3/5).



223





Shari'ah Standard  No (8):  Murabahah

of the profit  margin  and the duration  will not amount to rescheduling of
debt which  is prohibited by Shari'ah.
The basis for using options when  buying on Murabahah is the case of  Hib• ban Ibn Munqidh  when  the Prophet  (peace be upon  him),  said to him: if you  buy.  a condition  that there  is no cheating and that you  have a three day period for any of the goods bought.  Ifyou are satisfied,  then keep it and if you are not satisfied,  return  it to  the buyer."9 The ruling  on the application  of option  in Murabahah is endorsed by a resolution issued during the second
Fiqh  Forum  organised  by Kuwait Finance  House.
The basis for the impermissibility of a commitment fee is because such a fee is in exchange for  the right to contract, which  is  a mere intention  and wish that is  not a subject of exchange.
• The basis for  the impermissibility of a facility commission is  because  it is not allowed to receive commission in the event of giving out a loan  facility itself.  It is therefore a logical conclusion to disallow commission for a mere readiness  to finance  the customer  on a deferred  payment  basis.
■  The  basis for  allowing  that  the  expenses  of preparing the  document of contracts between  the Institution and  the customer be borne  by the two parties  is  because  both  parties will equally  benefit  from  this, and  more• over there  is no any impermissible act involved. The basis for the permis• sibility that  these expenses  may be borne  by one of the parties  is because this is a form  of condition  that  is permissible.
• The  basis  for the  permissibility of the  customer guaranteeing the  good performance of the supplier  is because  this guarantee secures  rights  and does not  adversely  affect any rules  of the Mura bah ah transaction.
The basis for not allowing  that  the customer guarantee the  risk of trans• portation of the goods  is  because  the safety of the goods  is  the responsi• bility of the owner  and  the customer  is  not the owner.  Hence,  the owner
must  bear the risk since the right to profit  is associated with bearing risk.
• The  basis for  the permissibility  of Hamish  Jiddiyyah  (security  deposit)  is because  it is  a form of guarantee  for any financial damage that may occur.
■  The basis for the permissibility of obtaining the earnest  money  to secure performance is the practice  ofUmar Ibn Al-Khattab (may Allah be pleased

(14)  The Hadith has been related  by Ibn Majah,  "Sunan Ibn Majal [2: 789].



224





Shari'ah  Standard No (8)  Murabahah

with him) in the presence of some companions  of the Prophet, peace be upon  him,  which has been permitted  by Imam  Ahmad.  A resolution has been issued  in connection with the permissibility of  'Arboun  (Earnest
Money)  by the International Islamic Fiqh Academy.

Acquisition of Title  to,  and  Possession  of,  the  Asset by the  Institution or its Agent
• The  basis  for  the  prohibition  of selling  a commodity  before  taking
possession  is  the saying of  the Prophet (peace be upon him):  "Do  not sell what you  own  not"? and the Hadith in which the  Prophet (peace  be upon him)  prohibits  a person  from selling  what he does not own 'The  basis for preferring that the Institution appoint an agent other than the purchase orderer in case of the need to do so is  to avoid a fictitious transaction  that shows  on paper that the acquisition  is  made on behalf of the Institution. This  is necessary in order that the Institution  appear as the real purchaser and in order to demarcate the liabilities of  the parties,  the liability  of the Institution  and the liability ct the purchase orderer after the sale contract.
■  The basis  for the requirement  that  the Institution  must pay the supplier directly  is to avoid the  risk of  the contract degenerating into mere interest• based financing.
■  The basis for the requirement  that the liabilities  ct the parties -in case the
Institution  acquires the goods through  agency- is  to demarcate  the two
liabilities.
■  The  basis  for  the  requirement  that  documents  must  be directed   to the Institution   is  because the  purchase  is  taking  place on behalf of the institution.
■  The basis  for the requirement  that the agent must explain to the supplier his agency status is to control the transaction and to determine the party to be referred  to for the execution of the contract.

(15)  The source of the Hadith has been stated  earlier.
(16)  Resolution  No.  72  (3/8)  in respect of 'Arboun  (Earnest Money).
(I7)  The Hadith has been related by Al-Tirmidhi  "Sunan al Tirmidhr" [3:  534].
(I8)  The Hadith has  been related by Al-Tabrani  in Al-Mu'jam  Al-Awsat"  [5:  66],  Dar Al• Haramayn, Cairo, I415  A.H.



225





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah

The basis for the  requirement  of possession  before  a sale contract  is to ensure  that  the Institution becomes  liable for  the  risk of destruction  of the commodity  before it is entitled  to sell it.
The  basis for  separating  an agency contract  from  a Murabahah  transac•
tion is  to be sure that there is no any intentional  arrangement to connect the two contracts.
The basis for  the rule that constructive  possession is sufficient to meet the
requirement  of possession and that possession  is  according  to the nature of the items is  because the Sharf'ah  did not state a particular  form  for  pos• session.  Rather this  is  left  to the customary  practices.  Again, the purpose of possession is  to enable one to have control  over something.  'Therefore, any procedure  that serves this objective would be regarded as possession.
The  basis  for  the  requirement  that  the  contract  of agency  be  separate
from the contract  of sale on a Murabahah  basis is because of the risk that the contracts  may be connected  lo each other.
The basis for the rule that the Institution  bear the expenses of insurance is  because these expenses follow ownership  of the goods.
Conclusion of a Murabahah Contract
The basis  for  the rule that the Institution is  entitled  to compensation  in case of breach of a binding  promise by the customer  to buy the goods is because of the damage that may be inflicted  on the Institution due to the act of the customer.  This is because the customer  has caused the Institu•
tion lo enter  into a deal that it  would not have concluded  in the absence of the promise.  The International Islamic Fiqh Academy has issued  a res• olution  in this respect,{
• The basis for the rule that  the  Institution's  rights  are limited,  in case of breach  of promise,  to the difference between  the cost of the item  to the Institution  and its  selling price to a third party  ii because the lawful  right in a guarantee  is limited  to the amount  that compensates  for the damage suffered and because the Institution's  right to recover loss  of its mark-up is  irrational  since there is no mark-up  unless there  is  actually a Muraba• hah transaction  and in this case there is no such  transaction.

(19)  International  Islamic  Fiqh Academy's resolution No. 40-41  (2/5 and 3/5).



226





Shari'ah  Standard  No (8):  Murabahah

The  basis  for the  requirement  of transparency as to  the  cost  price  is because  Murabahah is a trust  related  contract that  requires  disclosure Of  the  amount  and  the  currency of the  cost  price  because  a price  in a deferred  payment sale is higher.
The  basis for allowing normal  expenses  to be included  in computing  the
selling price  of the commodity  is  because these expenses are paid to a third
party.
The basis  for entitlement  of the buyer to benefit from the discount acquired by the Institution  is  because Murabahah  is a mark-up  sale.  Therefore,  if the previous purchasing  price decreases then the cost price is  the amount  that remains after the discount  and this price  is the cost price for the purpose  of the Murabahah.
The  basis for  the requirement that the price and the profit in Murabahah
must be determined is  to avoid uncertainty and lack of knowledge.
The  basis  for  the requirement  that the profit must be  separately disclosed from the  cost price and that  it is  not  allowed to be  calculated as a single amount   for  the  customer   is  because  Murabahah  is  a sale with  a profit margin.  Therefore,  it  is  necessary  this  profit  be disclosed  separately  to ensure that the customer will agree to it.
The  basis for the  permissibility of instalment payment is  because  Mu• rabahah   is  one  of the  sale  contracts that  are subject  to spot  payment, def 2rred payment or instalment payment.  The basis for the impermissi• bility of requesting an additional sum  of money  for delay in payment is because  this  is the prohibited Riha.
• The  basis for the permissibility of stipulating  a def 2ct  exclusion  item  is
because  a buyer is entitled  to require  guaranteeing hidden  defects which are related  to the sold commodity by the seller. However, the buyer may relinquish this  right  by agreeing  to a def ct  exclusion  item,  as stated  by a number of scholars,(2o
■  The  basis  for  the  permissibility   of stipulating  that  the  contract   would be  terminated  for  default  in  payment  is  because  the  original   princi-

(20)  See A!-Kasani,  "Bada 'r' AI-Sana  'r" [5: 276] Al-Mawwaq,  Al- Taj  Wa ALIkIil" [4 439]; Al-Shirazi,  41-Muhadhdhab" [1:  284]; bn Qudamah, "41-Maughnt" [4:  129]; and Al• Buhuti,  "Kashshaf Al-Qina" [3:  228].



227





Shari'ah  Standard No (8)  Murabahah

ple in respect  to  stipulations  Is  validity  and  permissibility.  In  addition, this  Item  does not  render  permissible  an impermisslble  act  or prohiblt a permisslble  act.  Hence,  this Item  falls under  the Hadith  that says  "Mus• lims are bound by the conditions  they made, except a condition  that renders permissible  an impermissible  act or prohibits  a permissible  act.
Guarantees  in Murabahah and Treatment of Murabahah Receivables The basls for the condition  that  all instalments  will become due if there ls delay  in payment  is the Hadlth  of the Prophet,  peace be upon him:  Mus• lims are bound  by the  condltions  they made,  and  because  payment  on a deferred basis ls the right of the buyer, and the buyer may choose to pay before  time  and  relinquish  the  deferral  of the  date ct payment  entirely
or make payment of all instalments  contingent  on  default on payment  of
one instalment.
■  The  basis  fa demanding  collateral  to  secure  payment  is  because  such a requirement  does not affect the contract;  rather, It consolidates perfor• mance and such guarantees are relevant  to contracts  involving credit.
The basis  for  not  allowing a stlpulation  that delays transfer  of ownership s because such a stlpulatlon  ls against the effect of a sale contract,  which s immediate  transfr of ownership. The basls for allowing the Institutlon
to hold  up registering  the commodity  in the name  ct the customer  until payment  is realised ls  that  such an actlon does not affect the transfer of ownershlp  to the buyer.
• The  basis  for the  permissibility  of stipulating  a conditlon,  whereby  the debtor in case ofi default is obliged  to donate a sum af money in additlon to the amount  of the  debt to be spent   by the Institution  on  charitable causes, is  because thls has been consldered  as  an instance of the commitment  to make a donatlon, whlch ks  well established  In the Maliki  school  oflaw. 'Thls

(21)  This Hadith has been reported by number cl the companions.  It has been related by Ahmad in his  Musnad [1:  312].  Ibn  Majah  through a good chain of transmission in his  "Sunan"  [2:  783], Mustafa  AI-Babi  AI-Halabi edition,  Cairo, 1372  A.H./1952  A.D; Al-Hakim  in his  "Mustadrak",  Hyderabad edition,  India,  1355  A.H.; Al-Bayhaqi  in his  "Sunan"  [6:  70  and 156]  and [I:  133],  Hyderabad  edition, India,  1355  A.H.;  and Al-Daraqutni in his  Sunan" [4:  228]  and [3: 77], Dar AI-Mahasin  LilTiba'ah edition, Cairo,  1372  A.H./1952  A.D.



228





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (8):  Murabahah

is the opinion of Abu Abdullah Ibn Nafi' and Muhammad Ibn Ibrahim bn
Dinar, among the Maliki jurists.G3
The  basis for  the prohibition of additional payment over the principal debt in  consideration  for  extension of time  is  because such  action  is a pre-Islamic form ofRiba.
The  basis for the permissibility of discount or rebate for earlier payment is because discount for early payment is a form of  settlement between the creditor  and the debtor to pay less  than the amount of the debt.  This is among the settlement  that are endorsed  by Shari'ah as stated in the case ofUbay Ibn Ka'b (may Allah be  pleased with him)  and his debtor where the Prophet (peace  be upon him)  suggested to him in words:  "write  off
a portion  of your debt)  The International Islamic  Fiah  Academy has
issued  a resolution  in support of this rule.99
a  The basis of the permissibility of payment of debt in another currency is that this would entail the settlement cf the debt by discharging it.  This does not involve any prohibited transaction  pertaining  to  debts either with regard to sale or purchase.
As for  some of the forms  mentioned in the standard,  there are texts to support them,  inter alia, the Hadith reported on the authority ofIbn Umar (may Allah be pleased with him)  who said:  T have met the Prophet (peace be  upon him)  at the house ofHafsah  (may Allah be pleased  with  her), and I said  to him:  'O Prophet of Allah,  I would like to ask you:  I sell a camel in Al-Baqi' for a price quoted in dinar but I take dirham,  and I sell  for a price quoted in dirham  but I  take dinars, I  take this  from this  and I give  this from this?'  The Prophet (peace be upon him)  replied:  'There is no objection
to your taking the other currency based  on the price  of the day, provided you
do  not  leave each  other with something remaining owed as a debt between
yow"5  Some of the forms  in the standard  are a kind of set-off and this is
permissible.

(22)  See  the book entitled:  "Tahrir Al-Kalam  F Masa'il Al-Hltizam" by  Al-Hattab.  This rule has been endorsed  by the resolutions and recommendations  of  the Fourth Fiqh Forum organized by the Kuwait Finance  House.
(23)  The Hadith  has been  related  by AI-Bukhari:  "Sahih Al-Bukhari" [1:  179]  and [2: 965]
(24)  The  International Islamic Fiqh Academy Resolution No. 64 (7/2).
(25)  Related   by Abu Dawud, AI-Tirmidhi,  Al-Nassa'i,  Ibn  Majah   and A!-Hakim,  who
deemed it a sound Hadith.  A!-Dhahabi agreed with Al-Hakim.  I was also  narrated without a chain  of narrators, quoting only bn  Umar:  "AL Talkhis AI-Habr" [(3:  26].



229





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah





Appendix (E)
Definitions


Murabahah

It is  the sale of a commodity by an institution to its customer (the  purchase orderer)  as per the  purchasing price/cost with  a defined and  agreed profit mark-up  (as  set  out in the promise/ Wad), in which case it is called a banking Murabahah.  The  banking Murabahah  involves  deferred  payment terms,  but such deferred payment is not one cf the essential conditions f such transaction, as ther2 is also a Murabahah arranged with no deferral  f payment. In this case, the seller only receives  a mark-up that only includes the profit for a spot sale and not the extra charge it would,  otherwise,  receive for deferral  of payment.

Commitment  Fee

A commitment fe is  the percentage  or amount  which  the Institution takes from  the customer  to start  processing  the transaction even though a sale contract may not be conduded).
'Arboun
The  term  'Arboun means  an amount of money  that the customer  as purchase  orderer  pays to the Institution after concluding  the Murabahah sale,  with  the provision  that  if the sale is  completed  during  a prescribed
period,  the  amount  will be counted  as part of the price.  If the customer
fails to execute  the Murabahah sale,  then  the  Institution may retain  the whole amount.

Syndicated  Financing

A  syndicated   financing   is   a  partnership  relationship   for  financing a particular  project which two or more parties has interest  to finance.  They will  distribute   the  profit  or  revenue  as per  agreement.  In  other  words, syndicated financing is  the acceptance of a number of companies  (financial Institutions)  to enter into a joint investment transaction  through  one of the permissible  investment  instruments with an understanding that one ct the



230





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murababah

parties assumes leadership  of the deal. During  the period  of the transaction, the transaction would  enjoy an independent liability separated  from  their companies.
Credit Facility

A credit  facility is  an upper  limit  for a customer's  Murabahah transac• tions.  This credit facility may be restricted  to a specified type of item,  or to a specified period of time.













































231

























