Shari'ah Standard No.  (9)



Ijarah and Ijarah
Muntahia Bittamleek

(Revised  Standard)



















This  standard was previously  issued by  the title  "Shari'ah Rules for Investment  and Financing Instruments No. (2) ljarah and ljarah Muntahia   Bittamleek.  It was reissued as a Shari'ah  standard  based on the  resolution  of  the Shari'ah  Board  to  reformat all Sharf'ah Rules in the form of Sharf'ah Standards.












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        238

I.  Scope  of the Standard ..........sos.sos.so.so.so.ososoooooooooo.sos.a.....                            338
2.  Promise to Lease (an  Asset) .........sos.s.so.sos.so.sos.sos.so.so.sos.s.a......                            338
3.  Acquisition of the Asset to Be Leased,  or Its Usufruct, by the Institution       239
4.  Concluding an ljarah Contract and the Forms ofljarah.....................        241
5  Subject Matter  of  Ijarah ..........sos. sos.s o.so.sas s·sos»s o.so.s o s« sos.s o s.s.so . +..                    243
6.  Guarantees and Treatment d Ijarah  Receivables.................................    246
7.  Changes to the Ijarah  Contract...............................................................        247
8. Transfer  of the Ownership in the Leased Property in ljarah Muntahia
Bittamleek..................................................................................................        249
9.  Date oflssuance of the Standard....................................................      251
Adoption of the Standard...............................a....a....................        252
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard..............        253
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard....................................        256
Appendix (c):   Definitions.............................................................................         266



















235








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE  ALL-MERCIFUL,  THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all his companions





Preface


This standard  outlines  the  basis of the  Shari'ah  rulings  on  ljarah  and Ijarah  Muntahia Bittamleek,  beginning with the rules relating to the promise to lease,  if any,  and concluding with the rules d repossession of the leased property in an operating Ijarah  by the lessor  or transferring  its  ownership in case of Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek,  within or by the end of the lease  term. The Standard  also aims to outline  the Shari'ah  requirements  that  must be observed  by  Islamic  financial  Institutions  (Institution/Institutions)' with respect to ljarah transactions.

























(2) The  word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



237





Shari'ah Standard No (9):  larah  and Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This  standard  covers  operating leases  of properties or Ijarah  Muntahia
Bittamleek,  whether the Institution is the lessor  or the lessee.

This  standard does  not  cover  Sukuk al-Ijarah, as  they  are  covered  by Shari'ah Standard on Investment Sukuk, nor the employment of persons (labour  contract),  as it is  covered  by a separate  standard.

2. Promise  to Lease (an  Asset)

2/1   In principle,  an ljarah  contract  is  executed  for  an asset  owned  by the lessor  or an usufruct owned  by the sub-lessor.  However,  it is  for a customer to request  an Institution to acquire the asset or to acquire the usufruct of an existing  asset which  the  customer wishes  to take on lease.
2/2  In principle, Ijarah may be effected directly  on the asset without any requirement of a preceding master agreement.  However, it  is permissible to  have a master agreement drawn  up  coveringa  number of Ijarah transactions between  the  Institution  and  the  customer, setting out
the  general   terms   and  conditions  of agreement  between   the  two parties. In this case, there  may either  be a separate  lease contract for each  transaction, in a specific  written document signed  by the two parties,  or alternatively the two parties may exchange  notices of offer and acceptance  by referring to the terms  and conditions contained in the master  agreement.

2/3  It  is  permissible for the Institution to require  the customer  who has promised to lease  to pay a sum of money  to the Institution to ensure the  customer's seriousness in accepting  a lease on the  asset and  the subsequent  obligations,  provided  no amount is  to be deducted from



238





Shari' ah  Stan dard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Mu ntahi a Bittamleek

this sum except in proportion  to the actual  damage  suffered  by  the Institution  in case  the customer  does not fulfil his promise.  Thus,  if the customer,  in case  of Ijarah  associated  with a promise  to transfer ownership, breaches his promise, the promisor shall be charged either the difference  between  the  cost  of the asset  intended   to  be  leased and the total lease  rentals for the asset which  is  leased  on the basis of ljarah  Muntahia  Bittamleek  to a third  party,  or,  in case of operating
ljarah,  the  promisor   breaching   his  promise  shall  be  charged  the difference  between the cost of acquisition  and the total selling price if sold to a third  party by the Institution (promisee).  Otherwise;  i.e., in case  it is not sold, the promisee  shall not be entitled to receive any compensation.

2/4  The  amount   of money  deposited  by  the  customer as security  for his  commitment  can be either  held  on  trust  in the custody  of the Institution  in which  case the latter  cannot  invest it,  or it  may be held on an investment trust basis in which case  the customer  permits  the Institution to invest it on the basis ofMudarabah between the customer and the Institution.  It is  permissible  to agree with the customer, upon the execution of the contract of lease, that this amount  shall be treated as an advance payment  of the instalments of the lease  rental.

3.  Acquisition of the Asset to Be Leased,  or Its Usufruct, by the Institution

3/1  For the  permissibility of an ljarah  contract  concerning   a specified asset,  the lease  contract  should  be preceded  by acquisition  of either the asset to be leased or the usufruct of that asset.

3/1/1  Ifthe asset or the usufruct thereof is owned  by the Institution, which   should   in  principle   be the  case,  an  Ijarah   contract may be executed  as soon  as agreement  is  reached  by the two parties.

3/1/2 However,  if the asset  is to be acquired  by the  customer  [see item  3/2  below],  or by a third  party,  the Ijarah  contract  shall not be executed  unless  and until  the Institution has acquired that  asset.



239





Shani'ah Standard No (9):  larah  and Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek

Ownership   is  possible  under a sale contract,  even if the title is  not registered in the purchaser's name (the Institution), and the purchaser has the right to obtain  a counter-deed to establish  the actual transfer of his ownership  of the asset. [see  item  3/5 below]

3/2   An asset may be acquired  by a party and then  leased  to that party.  In this case, the ljarah transaction  should not be stipulated as a condition of the purchase  contract by which the Institution acquires the asset.

3/3  A lessee  cf an asset may enter  into a sub-lease  contract with a party other  than the owner  for  a rental  that  is   either  the same,  lower  or higher, payable either currently  or on a def erred basis, unless the owner stipulates that  the lessee should  not assign or sublet  the property  to third parties,  or should not do so without  his approval.
3/4  The  lessee may  lease  the asset  back  to  its owner  in the  first  lease period   for  a rental  that  is  lower,  same  or  higher  than  what  be  is paying,  if the two rentals are paid  on a spot  basis.  However,  this  is not permissible  if it should  lead  to contract  of  Inah,  by varying  the rent  or the  duration.  For example,  it  is  not  permissible,  if the first rental  is  one hundred dinars  payable  on a spot  basis,  for the lessee to sublet  it to the lessor  fa one hundred and  ten dinars  payable  on a deferred basis, or if the first rental is  one hundred and  ten dinars payable  on a def erred  basis,  for  the  second  to be  for  one  hundred dinars  payable instantly, or if the two rentals are of the same amount, but the payment  of the first rental  is  def zrred for one month  and the second  rental  is  deferred  for two months.

3/5  An ljarah  contract may be executed  for an asset undertaken by the lessor to be delivered to the lessee according to accurate specifications, even  if the asset so described  is not owned  by the lessor.  In this case,
an agreement  is  reached  to make the described  asset available during the  duration   ct the contract,  giving  the lessor  the opportunity  to acquire  or to produce  it.  It is not a requirement of this lease that the rental should  be paid in  advance  as long as the lease   is not executed according  to the contract  of Salam (or Salaf). Should the lessee receive





Shari' ah  Stan dard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Mu ntahi a Bittaml eek

an asset that does not conform  to the description,  then he is entitled
to reject it and demand  an asset that conforms to the description.

3/6  An Institution's  customer  may jointly acquire an asset that he wishes to lease with  the  Institution,  and  then  lease the  Institution's  share of the asset from  the Institution. In this case, the rental  specified as receivable by the Institution  should  only be in proportion to its share in the  ownership  of the  asset, since the lessee  is  a co-owner  of the asset and therefore has to pay rent only on the share that he does not own.

3/7  An Institution  may appoint  one of its  customers  to act as its  agent in acquiring  on its  behalf an asset that  is  desired  by that  customer such as equipment, machinery,  etc., whose description  and price are fixed with a view to the Institution's  leasing  such asset or assets to the  customer  after it has acquired  their  ownership  through  either actual or constructive  possession.  Although  this type of agency (for the purchase  of the assets)  is permissible,  it is  always preferred  that the agent is someone other than the customer  (prospective  lessee)  as far  as possible.
4. Concluding an Ijarah Contract and the Forms  of Ijarah

4/1   Signature of the contract and the consequences thereof

4/1/1  The  lease  contract  is  a binding  contract  which  neither  party
may terminate  or alter without  the other's  consent  [see  items
5/2/2,  7/2/1,  and 7/2/2].  However, an ljarah  contract  may be
terminated in accordance with item  7/2/1.
4/1/2  The  duration  of an ljarah  contract  must  be  specified  in the contract.  The period  of ljarah  should  commence  on the date of execution  of the  contract,  unless  the two parties  agree on
a specified  future  commencement  date,  resulting  in  a  future ljarah,  that is, an ljarah contract  to be executed at a future date.

4/1/3  If the lessor. fails to deliver. the asset to the lessee on  the date specified in the ljarah  contract,  no rental is due for the period



241





Shari' ah  Stan dard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Mu ntahi a Bittaml eek

between  the  date  specified  in  the  contract   and  the  date  of actual delivery, and the rental should  be  reduced  accordingly, unless it is agreed that the lease  be extended  by an equivalent period  after its original expiry date.

4/1/4  'Arboun  (Earnest  Money)  may be taken  in respect  of lease  at the execution  of the contract of lease,  with the lessee having the right to terminate the contract during a specified  period of time,  and  'Arboun  is   treated   as an  advance  payment  of the rental.  If the  Ijarah  contract  is not executed  for a reason attributable   to the  lessee,  the lessor may retain  the  'Arboun. However,   it   is   pref zrable   for  the  Institution  to  forgo  any amount  in excess of the  actual  damage  it has suffered.  [see para.  3/2]

4/2 Forms of the Ijarah contract

4/2/1  ljarah  contracts  may be  executed  in respect  of the same asset for different periods for several lessees, provided that two contracts  are not executed in respect of the same asset for the same period.  Such an arrangement is called "successive leases", because  each  ljarah  is   considered  as  being  successive to  the previous  one and  not  concurrent with  it on  the  basis of its being  a future ljarah.  [see  item  4/1/2  above]

4/2/2  If the lessor  signs an ljarah  contract  for a particular  asset for a specified period of time, he cannot sign  another ljarah contract with another lessee  for the duration of  the existing ljarah period or for any remaining period thereof. [see  item  7/1/2  below]

4/2/3 An  Ijarah  contract  may be signed  with  several  lessees  being entitled  to  the  same  specified  usufruct   of a particular   asset and duration  of rent,  without  specifying  a  particular  period ct time  for  a particular  person.  In this case,  each lessee may benefit  from  the  property  during  the  time  assigned  to  him in  accordance  with  specified  rules.  This  case is one  form  of Muhaya 'ah (time-sharing) in benefiting  from the usufruct.



242





Shari' ah  Standard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Mu ntahi a Bittaml eek

4/2/4 A lessee may invite others to share with him in the usufruct  he owns.  In this case, they become  co-owners  in the usufruct  of the leased  property.  This can only be done before entering into a sub-lease.  If the property  is sub-leased  after the  co-owners having owned the usufruct  each co-owner  is  entitled to a share in the sub-lease rental pro rata to his share in the usufruct.

5. Subject  Matter of Ijarah

5/1   Rules governing  benefit and leased property

5/1/1  The leased  asset must be capable  of being used while preserving the asset, and the benefit from an Ijarah must be permissible by Shari'ah.  For example,  a house or a chattel  may not be leased for the purpose of an impermissible act by the lessee, such as leasing premises  to be used as headquarters  by an Institution  dealing in interest or to a shopkeeper  for selling or storing prohibited goods,  or leasing a vehicle to transport  prohibited merchandise.

5/1/2 The  subject  matter  ct Ijarah  may be a  share  in an undivided asset held  in common  with  the  lessee,  whether  the  lessee  is a partner  with  the  lessor  or  not.  In this case the  lessee  may benefit  from  the  leased  share  in the  same way in which  the
lessor used to benefit from it,i.e., by usufruct division  based on
Muhya'ah  ie.  by identifying  a particular  time  (time-sharing) or a particular  part of the property, used alternately  by the co• owners,  or any other means  with consent  of the other partner.

5/1/3  An Ijarah  contract may be executed for a house or a chattel, even with a non-Muslim,  if the use to be made of  it is  permissible, such as a house for residential  purposes, a car for transport,  or a computer to store data, unless the lessor  knows  in advance, or has reason to presume, that the use ct the asset to be leased will be for an impermissible purpose.
5/1/4  The lessee  must use the leased  asset in a suitable manner  or in conformity with common practice, and comply with conditions which  are acceptable  in Sharf'ah.  He must  also avoid causing



243





Shari' ah  Standard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Mu ntahi a Bittaml eek

damage  to the leased  asset by  misuse  through  misconduct   or negligence.
5/1/5  The lessor  must  accept  responsibility   for  any  defects  of the leased asset which impair the intended  use ct the asset, and may not exclude his liability for any impairment that the leased asset may sustain,  either  by  his own doing  or as a result  of events outside  his control,  which  affect the benefits  intended   to be available under  the ljarah contract.

5/1/6  If the benefit from the leased asset is impaired wholly or partially as a result of the lessee's misconduct, while the property  remains under lease, the lessee is obliged to restore or repair the usuf:ruct, and rent for the time during which the benefit is lost is not to be waived.

5/1/7 The lessor may not stipulate  that the lessee will undertake the major  maintenance of the  asset that  is  required  to keep  it in the  condition   necessary   to  provide  the  contractual  benefits under  the lease.  The lessor  may delegate  to the lessee  the task of carrying   out  such  maintenance  at  the  lessor's  cost.  The lessee should carry out operating  or periodical  (ordinary) maintenance.
5/1/8  The leased asset is the responsibility of the lessor throughout the duration   of the ljarah,  unless  the lessee  commits  misconduct or negligence.  The lessor  may take out permissible  insurance on  it  whenever   possible,  and  such  insurance   expenses  must be borne  by the  lessor. The  lessor may take this into  account implicitly when the lease rental is to be fixed.  However, he may not,  after the contract is  signed,  charge  the lessee  any cost in
excess of the cost anticipated  at the time of fixing the rent. The lessor  may  also delegate  to  the  lessee  the  task  of taking  out insurance  at the lessor's  expense.

5/2 Rules governing lease rentals

5/2/1  The lease rental  may be in cash or in kind  (goods)  or benefit
(service).  The  rental  must  be specified,  either  as a lump  sum



244





Shari' ah  Standard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Mu ntahi a Bittaml eek

covering the duration  of the Ijarah contract,  or by instalments for parts of the duration. It may also be  for a fixed or variable amount,  according  to  whatever  designated  method   the  two parties  agree upon.  [see  item 5/2/3 below]
5/2/2 The rental  is  made  obligatory  by the contract  and the lessor's entitlement  to the  rental  runs  from the  time  when the lessee starts  to  benefit  from the asset or once the  lessor  makes the usufruct  of the asset available to the lessee,  and the entitlement to  the rental  does  not  necessarily  commence  on  the  date  of signing the ljarah  contract. The rental may be paid entirely in advance or in instalments  during a period equivalent,  or more or less,  to the  duration  of the  ljarah.  However,  if the asset is made available only after a period longer  than what customary practices deem proper,  then no payment  shall be  obligatory.

5/2/3 In case  the  rental  is  subject  to changes  (floating rental),  it  is necessary that the amount of the rental of the first period of the ljarah contract  be  specified in lump sum. It is  then permissible that the rentals for subsequent  periods  be determined  accord• ing to  a certain  benchmark.   Such  benchmark   must  be  based on a clear formula  which  is  not subject to dispute,  because it becomes the determining  factor for the rentals of the remain• ing periods. This benchmark  should be subject   to a ceiling, on both maximum  and minimum  levels.

5/2/4  It may be agreed that the rental should consist of two specified parts:  one to be paid or transferred  to the lessor  and the other to be held by the lessee to cover any expenses or costs approved by the lessor, such as the cost of major maintenance, insurance,
etc.  The excess of the second part  of the rental shall be treated as an advance  to the lessor  on account,  while  the lessor  shall bear any shortage.

5/2/5 The amendment of future rentals is permissible by the agreement cf both parties, i.e. the periods  for which the lessee has not yet received any benefit. The rentals of  any previous periods which



245





Shari' ah  Standard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Mu ntahi a Bittamleek

have not yet been paid become a debt owed to the lessor  by  the lessee,  and therefore cannot be increased.

6. Guarantees  and Treatment  of Ijarah Receivables

6/1  Permissible  security,  of all kinds, may be taken  to  secure the rental payments or as a security against misuse or negligence on the part ct the lessee,  such as a charge  over assets, guarantees or an assignment ct rights over assets of the lessee  held   by third parties, even if such rights are a permissible  life or property insurance indemnity in favour of the lessee.

6/2  The two parties may agree that the rental be paid fully in advance.  It is  also permissible to make the rent payable in instalments, in which case the lessor  may stipulate that the lessee  should immediately pay the remaining  instalments  if he,  after receiving a specified period of
due notice,  delays, without a valid reason,  payment ct one instalment
or more, provided that the asset shall be made available for: the lessee to  use  for  the  remaining  period  of time.  Any  stipulated  upfront rental or accelerated  -because  of delay of payment-  rental is  subject to settlement  at the end of the ljarah period  or,  if the Ijarah  contract is  terminated  earlier,  at the time of such termination.  Any extension of time by the lessor  after the stipulated  time  for prompt  payment is  considered  as a consent  to  def rral  of payment  throughout   the extension  period  and not a right of the lessee,  subject always to item
5/2/2  above.

6/3 No increase  in the rental due may be stipulated  by the lessor  in case of delay in payment by the lessee.

6/4  It  may be  provided  in  the  contract  of  Ijarah  or  ljarah  Muntahia Bittamleek  that  a lessee  who  delays  payment  for  no  good  reason undertakes  to donate  a  certain  amount  or percentage  ct the rental due  in  case  of  late  payment.   Such   donation   should  be  paid  to charitable  causes under the co-ordination  of the Institution's Shari'ah Supervisory  Board.
6/5  In case of foreclosure  of the  security  provided  by the  lessee,  the lessor may deduct from  such  amounts only  what is due in  respect



246





Shari' ah  Standard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Mu ntahi a Bittaml eek

of  rental   for  previous   periods,  and   not   all  rental  instalments, including instalments which  have not yet fallen  due and  in respect of periods for which  the lessee has not had the benefit  of the leased asset. The  lessor  may  also deduct   from  the  security  all legitimate compensations necessitated by the lessee's breach  of contract.

7.  Changes to the ljarah  Contract

7/1   Selling of or damage to the leased  asset

7/1/1  If the lessor sells the leased asset to the lessee, the ljarah contract is  terminated  due to the transfer of the ownership  of  the leased asset and ownership  of usufruct  to the lessee.

7/1/2  The lessor  may sell the leased asset to a third  party other  than the lessee, and the title to the asset together with the rights and obligations  of the  lessor  under  the  ljarah  contract is  thereby transferred  to the new owner,  because  the asset and the rights and  obligations  attached  to it  become  the  right  of the  third party.  The  lessee's  consent  is  not  necessary  when  the  lessor
decides  to sell the asset to a third  party.  If the purchaser   does
not know about  the ljarah  contract, he may terminate the sale contract,  but  if he knows about  it and consents  to it,  he takes the place of the previous  owner in his entitlement to the rental for the remaining period.
7/1/3  In case of total destruction of the leased asset, the ljarah contract is  terminated if it is concluded  on an identified  asset. In such a case,  it may not be stipulated  that the rest of the instalments should  be paid.
7 /1/4 The leased asset in the  possession  of the  lessee  is  held by the lessee in a fiduciary  capacity on behalf of the lessor.  The lessee will not  be held  liable  for  any damage  or destruction  of the leased asset unless  such  damage  or destruction is  a result  of misconduct or negligence on the part of the lessee.  In this case, he is  obliged  to replace the asset if it is replaceable;  otherwise, he is  liable for the amount  of the damage  to be determined by valuation.



247





Shari' ah  Standard No  (9):  larah  and Ijara h Mu ntahi a Bittaml eek

7/1/5  In case of the partial  destruction of the leased asset in a manner that  impairs  the  benefits  expected  from  the  leased  asset, the lessee  may  terminate  the ljarah   contract.   Both  he and  the
lessor  may  also agree  to  amend  the  rental  in case ct partial
destruction  of the leased property,  if the lessee waives his right to termination.  The lessor  in this  case is   not  entitled to  rent for the period  during  which  the lessee was not  able to benefit from the asset unless the lessor makes it up (by agreement with the  lessee)  with  a like  benefit  after  the  expiry  of the  period specified in the contract.  [see para.  5/1/6]
7/1/6  In an ljarah Mawsufah fi al-Dhimmah  (contract  for an unidenti• fied  asset undertaken  by the lessor  to be delivered according  to the agreed specifications),  the owner in cases ct total and partial destruction  must offer an alternative asset having a specification
similar to that of  the destroyed  asset,  unless otherwise  agreed  at the time. The Ijarah shall continue  for the remaining  time ct the contract. If it  is not possible to provide a substitute asset, the con• tract will be terminated.  [see item  3/5]

7/117  If the  lessee  stops  using  the  leased  asset  or  returns   it  to  the owner  without  the  owner's  consent,  the  rental  will continue to  be due  in  respect  of  the  remaining  period   of the  ljarah, and  the  lessor  may  not  lease  the  property:  to  another lessee for this period,  but must  keep it at the disposal  of  the current lessee unless the lessee relinquishes to the lessor the remaining
period  ct time,  in which  case the lease expires.  [see  item 7/2/ 1
below]

7/2  Termination,  expiry  and renewal  of the ljarah contract

7/2/1   It is  permissible  to terminate  the lease contract  by mutual  con• sent but it is not permissible  for one party to terminate  it except in case of force majeure  or there  is  a defect  in the leased  asset that materially impairs its use. 'Termination is also possible when one party secures  an option  to terminate the contract in which case the party who holds the option  may exercise it during  the specified  period.



248





Shari' ah  Standard  No.  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Muntahia  Bittaml eek

7/2/2  The lessor may stipulate that the ljarah contract  be terminated
if the lessee does not pay the rent or fails to pay it on time.

7/2/3  An Ijarah contract  does not terminate with the death  of either party  thereto.  However,  the heirs  of the lessee may terminate the  Ijarah  contract if they  can prove  that  the  contract  has become,  as a result  of the  death  cf their  legator,  too  onerous for their  resources  and  in excess cf their  needs.

7/2/4 An  ljarah  contract   expires  with  the  total  destruction  of the leased  asset  in the  case of leasing  a specific  asset or with  the inability  to enjoy the usufruct  owing to the loss  of the benefit that the asset was intended to provide.

7/2/5 The  two parties  may  terminate the  ljarah  contract before  it begins  to run.
7/2/6  The lease  expires upon the expiry of its term, but it  may remain operative  for a good cause, such as the  late arrival to the place intended  in the lease  of transportation  vehicles, and in the case of a late  harvesting  period  for  land  leased  for  crop cultivation. The lease then continues  with the rental based on the prevailing market value. An ljarah  may be renewed  for another term, and such renewal may be made before the expiry of the original term or automatically  by adding  a provision  in the new contract  for such renewal when the new term starts, unless either party serves a notice on the other of its desire not to renew the contract.
8. Transfer  of the Ownership in the Leased Property  in ljarah Muntahia
Bittamleek

8/1   In Ijarah  Muntahia   Bittamleek,  the method  of   transferring   the title in the leased  asset to  the  lessee  must  be  evidenced  in a document separate from the ljarah contract document, using one cf the following methods:

a)  By means of a promise to sell for a token or other consideration, or by accelerating  the payment  of the remaining  amount  cf rental, or by paying the market value of the leased property.



249





Shari' ah  Standard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Mu ntahi a Bittaml eek

b)  A promise  to give it as a gift (for  no consideration).

c)  A promise  to give it as a gift, contingent upon the payment  of the
remaining instalments.

In all these cases, the separate  document  evidencing  a promise of gift, promise  of sale or a promise  of gift contingent  on a particular event,  should  be independent of the contract  of ljarah Muntahia Bittamleek and cannot  be taken as an integral  part  ct the contract of Ijarah.

8/2  A promise  to  transfer  the  ownership  by way of one of the  methods specified in item  8/1  above is a binding promise by the lessor. However, a binding promise is  binding  on one party only,  while the other party must have the option not to proceed. This is to avoid a bilateral promise by the two parties which is Shari'ah  impermissible  because it resembles a concluded contract.

8/3  In all cases of transfer  af ownership  by way of gift or sale, it is  neces• sary, when  the promise is  fulfilled, that a new contract  be  drawn  up, since  the  ownership  to the  property  is  not automatically transferred
by virtue af the original promise  document  that was drawn up earlier.

8/4  In case the ljarah contract  is combined, through  a separate document, with  a gift  contingent  upon  the  condition  that  the  remaining   rent instalments be paid, the ownership to the leased property  is transferred to the lessee if the condition  is fulfilled, without the need for any other
procedure  to be  adopted  or a document  to be signed.  However,  if the
lessee's payment  is  short of even one instalment, the ownership to the property  is  not transferred to him,  since the condition has not been fulfilled.

8/5  If the leased asset was purchased from the lessee before it was leased back  to  the  lessee   on  the  basis  of Ijarah  Muntahia  Bittamleek, a (reasonable)  period  of time, between  the  lease contract and  the time  of the  sale  of the  asset  to  the  lessee,  must  have  expired,  to avoid  the  contract of 'Inah.  This  period   must  be  long  enough   so that the leased property or its value could  have changed.  This shall



250





Shari' ah  Standard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Mu ntahi a Bittaml eek

also apply  to the  case of early ownership of the asset  where  a sale contract is concluded during the ljarah.  [see para.  7/1]
8/6  Subject  to item  8/8  below,  the  rules  governing ljarah  must  apply to the ljarah  Muntahia Bittamleek,  i.e.  when  a promise is made  by the lessor to transfer  the ownership  in the leased  asset to the lessee. None  ct these  rules  should  be breached under  the pretext  that  the leased asset was bought  by the lessor on the basis of a promise  by the lessee that he would acquire  it or that ownership  of it would devolve upon  him,  or that  he would  pay rentals  in excess of those  payable in respect  of a similar  property which  are similar  in amount  to the instalments of an instalment sale, or that local laws and conventional banking  practices consider  such  a transaction as an instalment sale with a deferred transfer of the ownership.
8/7  Transfer  of the  ownership   in the  leased  property cannot  be made by executing, along with the ljarah,  a sale contract that will become effective on a future  date.

8/8  If the leased asset is  destroyed  or if the continuity of the lease  contract becomes  impossible  up to the expiry period  without  the cause being attributable  to  the  lessee  in either  case,  then  the rental  is  adjusted based on the prevailing  market value.  That  is,  the difference  between the  prevailing  rate of rental  and  the rental specified  in the contract must  be refunded  to the lessee if the latter  rental  is  higher  than  the former. This is to avoid loss to the lessee, who agreed to a higher rental payment  compared  to the prevailing  rate of rental in consideration  ct the lessor's promise to pass the title to him upon the expiry of the lease term.

9. Date  of Issuance of the Standard

This  Standard was issued on 4 Rabi' I, 1423  A.H., corresponding to 16 May
2002A.D.










251





Shani'ah Standard No (9):  larah  and Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah standard  for ljarah and Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek was adopted by the Sharf'ah  Board  in its meeting No.  (4) held  on 25-27 Safar
1421  A.H.,  corresponding to 29-31  May 2000 A.D.

In its meeting No. (8) held  in Mecca on 28 Safar - 4 Rabi' I,  1423 A.H. corresponding   to  11-16  May 2002  A.D.,  the  Sharf'ah  Board  readopted a resolution to reformat the Sharf'ah rules for ljarah and ljarah Muntahia Bittamleek in the form of a Shari'.ah standard.






































252





Shari' ah  Standard  No.  (9):  ljarah  and Ijarah  Muntahia  Bittaml eek





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (1) held on 11  Dhul-Hajjah  1419 A.H., corresponding to  27 February  1999  A.D.,  the  Shari'ah  Board  decided  to  give  priority to  the  preparation  of the  Shari'ah  rules  for Ijarah  and  Ijarah  Muntahia Bittamleek.
On  Tuesday  13  Dhul-Hajjah  1419  A.H.,  corresponding to 30 March
1999  A.D.,  the Fatwa and Arbitration  Committee decided  to commission a Shari'ah  consultant to prepare  a juristic  study  and  an exposure  draft en the Shari'ah  Rules for ljarah  and ljarah  Muntahia Bittamleek.
In its meeting  held on  13-14  Rajab  1420  A.H.,  corresponding to 22-23
October  1999 A.D., the Fatwa and Arbitration Committee discussed the exposure draft of the Shari'ah Rules for ljarah and ljarah Muntahia  Bitamleek, and asked the consultant to make the amendments in light cf the comments made by the members.
The  revised  exposure  draft of the  Shari'ah  Rules  was  presented  to  the
Shari'ah  Board in  its meeting No.  (3) held in Mecca on 10-15  Ramadan  1420
A.H., corresponding to 18-22 December  1999 A.D. The Sharl'ah Board made further  amendments to the exposure  draft of the Shari'ah  Rules and decided that  it should  be distributed  to specialists  and interested  parties  in order  to obtain their comments  in order to discuss them in a public hearing.

A public  hearing was held in Bahrain  on 29-30 Dhul-Hajjah  1421  A.H., corresponding to 4-5 April 2000 A.D.  The public  hearing  was attended  by more  than   30 participants  representing  central   Institutions,  accounting firms,  Shari'ah  scholars,  academics  and  others  who  are interested in this field. The members responded  to the written  comments  that were sent prior



253





Shari'ah  Standard No.  (9):  ljarah  and Ijarah  Muntahia  Bittamleek

to the public  hearing  as well as to the oral comments  that  were expressed in the public hearing.

The Shari'ah Standards Committee  and the Fatwa and Arbitration  Com• mittee held a joint  meeting  on 21-23 Muharram   1421  A.H.,  corresponding to 26-28 April 2000 A.D. to discuss the comments  made about the Shari'ah Rules.  The committee  made the amendments which it considered  necessary in light of the discussions  that took place in the public hearing.

The Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. (4) held on 25-27 Safar 1421 A.H. corresponding to 29-31 May 2000 A.D., in  Al-Madinah   Al-Munawwarah discussed  the amendments  made  by the Shari'ah  Studies  Committee   and the Fatwa and  Arbitration  Committee,  and made  the amendments which
it  considered  necessary.  Some paragraphs ct the standard  were adopted  in the  name  d' Shari'ah  Rules for Ijarah  and  Ijarah  Muntahia   Bittamleek  by the unanimous vote of the members  of the Shari'ah  Board,  while the other paragraphs  were adopted by the majority vote of the members, as recorded in the minutes  of the Shari'ah  Board.

In its  meeting  No.  (7) held  on 9-13  Ramadan  1422  A.H.  corresponding to  24-28 November  2001  A.D.,  in Makkah  Al-Mukarramah,  the  Shari'ah Board decided  to convert  all Shari'ah  rules for Investments and Financing to Standards  and a committee  was formed  for this purpose.

In its  meeting  No.  (8) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah en 28 Safar
- 4 Rabi' I,  1423 A.H. corresponding to  11-16 May 2002 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board  adopted   the  reformatting  of   Shari'ah  Rules  for  ljarah  and  ljarah Muntahia  Bittamleek  in the  name  of Shari'ah  Standard  No. (9)  on ljarah and Ijarah  Muntahia  Bittamleek.  The committee  did not make any changes to the substance.

The  Shari'ah  Standards  Review  Committee reviewed  the  standard  in its meeting held in Rab'  II,  1433 A.H. corresponding to March 2012 A.D, in the State of Qatar, and proposed after deliberation a set of amendments (additions, deletions, and rephrasing) as deemed  necessary, and then submitted  the proposed amendments to the  Shari'ah  Board  for approval as it  deemed  necessary.



254





Shari'ah Standard No (9):  ljarah  and  Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek

In  its  meeting  No.   (39)  held  in  the  Kingdom   of Bahrain   on  13-15
Muharram   1435  A.H.,  corresponding  to  6-8  November  2014  A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Board  discussed  the  proposed   amendments  submitted   by  the Shari'ah  Standards  Review  Committee.  After  deliberation,  the  Shari'ah Board approved necessary  amendments,  and the standard  was adopted  in its current  amended  version.
















































255





Shari' ah Standard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Permissibility  of Ijarah  and ljarah  Muntahia Bittamleek
ljarah  derives permissibility  from  the Qur 'an,  the Sunnah,  consensus
of Fuqaha and Ijtihad (reasoning).
+  On  the  level  of the  Qur 'an,  Allah,  the Almighty,  says:   {"said  one of them 'O my father  engage him on wages"},and {"ifyou had wished, surely you could have exacted some recompense for it}!
■  The authority for the permissibility of ljarah  in the Sunnah  is the saying of the  Prophet  (peace  be upon  him):   "Whoever   hired  a  worker  must
inform him of his wages",'and his saying:  "Give a worker  his wages before
his sweat  (body odour)   is dried".9
■  The permissibility  of Ijarah also generated  consensus  among the legal community.  The  ljarah  is  also acceptable  by  reasoning  because  it is a convenient  means for people to acquire  right  to use assets that they do not own since not all people may be able to own tangible assets. The Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek,  on the other hand,  is  not different in its rules  from an ordinary ljarah,  except that it is  associated with a promise by the lessor  to  transfer  ownership  at the end of the  ljarah  term.  The
permissibility of this form  of Ijarah  is  confirmed  by the  resolution  of International  Islamic Fiqh Academy which explained the impermissible and the permissible forms of ljarah Muntahia Bittamleek.
■  It must  be noted  that  the  permissible  Ijarah  Muntahia  Bittamleek  is
different from hire-purchase  as commonly practised by the conventional

(3)  [Al-Qasas  (The  Narrative):  26). (4)  [AI-Kahf (The  Cave):  77].
(5)  This Hadith  has been related  by Ibn Majah  in his Sunan" [2: 817];  and Al-Haythami  in
"Majan' Al-Zawa'id"  [4:  98]
(6)  This Hadith  has been reported  by Ibn Majah in his "Sunan" [2:  817];  and A!-Tabrani in
41-Mjam Al-awsaf; and Al-Haithami in Majam' Al-Zawa'id"  [4:  98].
(7)  Resolution of the International  Islamic Fiqh Academy No.  110 (4/12).



256





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Muntahia  Bittamleek

banks in the following respects.  In hire-purchase, the terms and provisions of sale and leasing  are applied to the  subject  matter   at the  same time, and subsequently  the ownership of the  subject matter   is transferred  to the lessee (buyer),  once he pays the  last instalment without the need for a separate contract for the transfer of ownership. In the permissible Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek, on the other hand, the provisions governing ljarah are applied  to the leased asset until the end ct the Ijarah term, after which the lessee obtains  ownership of the asset in the manner explained in this Standard.
• It must be noted also that the ljarah contract intended in this Standard is the  lease  of tangible assets (chattels  or property),  which is  a contract giving a legal title to legitimate and identified usufruct  for a defined period of time in exchange for  a legitimate  and determined consideration.
Promise to Lease an Asset
The basis for allowing  the  Institution to demand payment of money by a party who has promised to take the property as lessee  is the need to confirm the commitment of the promissor.  This is  because  a binding promise has financial implications  if the promissor  retracts the  promise.  The request for payment of a commitment fze is  to cater for financial  damage  that the Institution  may have incurred as a result   of the promissor  taking back the promise or defaulting in payment. The unified Shari'.ah  Supervisory Board of Al Baraka issued a Fatwa in respect to Hamish Jiddiyyah (security deposit) in Murabahah. CBI   This  ruling is  also applicable  to Ijarah.

Acquisition of the Asset to be Leased,  or Its Usufruct, by the Institution
■   The basis for not allowing the leasing of an asset that is  not owned  by the lessor   is  the Hadith  that prohibits one from selling what he  does  not own,"and ljarah proper is a sale of usufruct.  The basis for allowing the leasing back of an asset to the person from whom the asset was acquired is because such  a transaction does not involve  any Inah sale.
■  The basis for not allowing a simultaneous combination of Ijarah and sale is  because making purchase contracts  contingent  upon leasing contracts is impermissible by an explicit text in the view of a number

(8)  International Islamic Fiqh Academy  Resolution No.  110 (4/12).
(9)  Fatwa of Unified  Shari'ah  Board of Al Baraka No.  (9/10).



257





Shari' ah  Stan dard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Muntahia Bittamleek

of jurists.  This is prohibited  by a well-known  Hadith  which prohibits two sales in one sale. (o)
The  basis  for the  permissibility  of sub-leasing  when  the  lessor  has allowed it is because the lessee has ownership af the usufruct  by virtue of the Ijarah contract, in which case he is entitled to transfer such usufruct for consideration  as he deems fit. The basis for impermissibility of sub• leasing when the lessor has not allowed it is because the ownership  of usufruct  by the lessee is  limited  in which case the lessee is  obliged to consider  any limitations  on this ownership.
• The basis  for the  permissibility of leasing a property  on  the basis  of specifications even if the lessor  does not own it is that this will not lead to dispute,  in which case it is  similar to a Salam  contract.  However,  in
this case the lessor should not request advance payment  of the rentals according to one of the views of the Shafi'is  and Hanbalis.
• The basis  for pref zrring  that the agent who purchases on behalf of the
Institution  be someone  other  than  the  customer  (lessee)    is  to  avoid fictitious  transactions  and to demonstrate  the genuine role of the Insti• tution  in making the usufruct  of the asset available  to the lessee.
Contract of ljarah
• The basis for the binding  nature of an ljarah contract is  because ljarah is  one  of the  contracts  for  transf zrring  ownership  that  depends  on an  exchange  of counter-values.  The  Shari'ah  principle  is  that  these contracts are binding because of the Saying of Allah, the Almighty:  {:...
Fulfil (your) obligations."}.   The  basis for allowing cancellation  of
an ljarah contract  due to contingencies  is because without the right to cancel the ljarah contract  the lessee would waste money by paying rent for unneeded  usufruct  due to an event of which he did  not contribute
to the occurrence.
• The basis  for requiring a designated term for the lease  is because without such a designated   term  there would be an uncertainty  that might  lead to dispute.  The basis for allowing an ljarah contract take effect  based on

(I0)  The Hadith  has been  related  by Abu Dawud in his "Sunan" [3:  283]
(II)  The Hadith has been related  by  Ahmad,  Al-Nas'i  and ATirmidhi.  Al-Tirmidhi
autheticated the Hadith: see, Nay! Al-Awtar" [5:  248].



258





Shari' ah  Standard No  (9):  ljarah  and Ijarah  Mu ntahi a Bittaml eek

future  events is  because ljarah  is,  unlike  a sale contract, a contract that involves time  and  for this it  is  relevant that  it  be contingent  on future events.
• The basis for the permissibility of obtaining  'Arboun  (Earnest  Money)
to secure  performance is the  practice  of Umar  Ibn Al-Khattab   (may Allah be pleased with him)  in the presence  of some companions of the Prophet  (peace be upon him). This practice  is also permitted by Imam Ahmad. A resolution  has been  issued in connection  with  the permis• sibility of 'Arboun (Earnest Money)  by the International  Islamic Fiqh Academy.3
■  The  basis for  the  impermissibility  of re-leasing  after the  lease of the asset is that under  the first contract,  the usufruct of the asset no longer belongs to the owner, and a new contract  may not be signed with another lessee before  the  contract  with  the  first  lessee is  terminated.  Hence, this form of ljarah  is not suitable as an investment  instrument, because it  constitutes an impermissible sale of the rent  receivable  pursuant   to providing  new lessees with  an asset already  leased out  to the existing lessee.  The  form just  described  is  different   from  the  transfer,  by the owner,  of the ownership  of the leased  assets to an investor, so that the latter takes his place,  wholly or partially,  with  regard to the ownership of all or some  parts of the  assets,  as well as in the  ownership   ct the usufruct  of, and entitlement  to his  share of the rent from,  those  assets. Al Baraka Forum  has issued a resolution  disallowing  multiple  leases of the same asset after the first ljarah  contract.G
+  The basis for allowing successive leases on the same specified usufruct of
a particular  asset without  specifying a particular period  for a particular person  is  because the usufruct  -in line with  the term  assigned  to each party-  can accommodate the parties.  The justification for  not allowing a specific  term  for each person  is  that  each  party  will know the term to which  he is  entitled  in his turn  and  because  their  applications  are considered in  order.  This rule  was supported by a resolution of Al Baraka
Forum.99

(12)   [AI-Ma' idah (The  Table):  1].
(13)   Resolution  No.  72  (3/8)  in respect of 'Arboun  (Earnest  Money). (14)   Resolution  No.  (13/4).



259





Shari'ah Standard No.  (9):  larah  and Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek

The basis for the requirement  that incorporating co-lessees must take place before any sub-lease contract is signed  is because sub-leasing the property means the sub-lessor no longer  owns the usufruct,  and thus he would be leasing out a benefit cf the usufruct that he does not own, which  is not permissible in Shari'ah as stated earlier. The jurists have considered  a bankrupt  lessor -a  person who leases things he does not own- among those who must be restricted in using their property.
Subject Matter of ljarah
• The basis for the requirement  that the leased  asset must be capable of being used while preserving the asset is  that the subject of a lease is usufruct and not the asset, as leasing is not possible for things that perish by use. The basis for the requirement that benefit from Ijarah must be permissible  is  that leasing an asset that will be used in impermissible way makes the lessor an accomplice in doing evil and this is prohibited as  per the saying of Allah,  the Almighty:  {"Help  you one another in Al-Birr and At-Taqwa (virtue,  righteousness  and piety)}9
■   The basis for the  irnpermissibility of stipulating a defect exclusion clause in respect to the leased asset is that such a condition defeats the purpose of the contract,  which  is  exchange of usufruct  for  rentals.  If the usufruct is partially or wholly impaired, the receipt of the rentals by the lessor becomes a form of unjust enrichment.  The resolution of the International  Islamic Fiqh Academy has declared that the lessor must accept responsibility for any destruction  or impairment  of the leased asset insofr as these events are not sustained as a result of misconduct or negligence on the part  of the lessee.9 The Fatwa of the unified Shari'ah Supervisory Board of Al Baraka states that the lessor is  not entitled to exclude his liability in respect of defects in the leased asset.(
■  The reason why the lessor may not stipulate that the lessee will undertake the major maintenance of the leased asset is that this condition def 2ats the purpose of an ljarah  contract.  Again,  it is the duty of the lessor to ensure that the usufruct  is  intact, and this is  not possible unless the asset is  maintained  and kept safe so that the lessor  may be  entitled

(15)  Resolution  No. (10/1).
(16)  [AIL-Ma' idah (The Table):  2].
( 17)  International Islamic  Fiqh Academy Resolution No.  13 (1/3).



260





Shari' ah Standard  No.  (9):  ljarah  and Ijarah  Muntahia  Bittamleek

to the  rentals  in consideration   for  the  usufruct.   The  unified  Shari'ah
Supervisory  Board  of Al Baraka issued a fatwa supporting  this.9
The reason why insurance expenses must be borne by the lessor  is that the owner of the asset is responsible  for insuring  it,  and the lessor  is the owner. 'This  is supported  by the resolution  issued by the International Islamic Fiqh Academy.09
• The basis for the permissibility of using a certain  benchmark or price index to determine rentals of subsequent periods  after the expiration of  the  first  period  of  an  ljarah   contract  is   that   the  rentals   will subsequently be known.  This  is  similar  to the  principle  of Ujrat al• Mith/ (prevailing market  rate of rental)  and does not lead to dispute. Again,  using a benchmark to determine  the rentals  is  to the benefit cf all parties  since there  is  possibility  of rental  fluctuation  that  may be in favour  of either  the lessee  a the lessor  in view of the fact that the contract  remains  binding  on both  parties  throughout its term.  This rule is supported by a Fatwa issued  during  Al Barakas IL  Forum.
The  basis  for  the  permissibility   of restructuring   the  rentals  for  the
future  periods is  that such an act is deemed to create a new contract  for a new term for  which the rentals are not yet due.  Hence,  the rentals  are not  regarded  as a  debt,  in which case the prohibition  of rescheduling rentals in return  for higher payment is  not applicable to this.  However, increasing previously agreed rentals in exchange for a def zrred  period of payment is a form of Riba.
Guarantees and  Treatment of ljarah Receivables
■   The basis  for the  permissibility  of obtaining  guarantees  for payment is that this is not contrary to the purpose  of an ljarah contract. Rather guarantees  are relevant to credit transactions because they secure per• formance.
The basis for the permissibility  of a payment  acceleration  clause is  the
saying of the Prophet  (peace   be upon him):  "Muslims are bound  by the conditions  they made, and because payment  on a deferred  basis is  the right of the lessee  (the  debtor  as to rentals),  and the lessee  may,  based

(18)  Fatwa of the Unified Sharf'ah  Board  of Al Baraka No.  (1/97). (I9)  Fatwa of the Unified  Sharf'ah  Board  of Al Baraka No (9/9).



261





Shari'ah Standard No.  (9):  larah  and Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek

on agreement,  choose to pay before time and relinquish  the deferral of the date of payment  entirely.  The lessee  may also agree to a stipulation that bases acceleration  of payment  on the event of default in payment.
• The basis of the prohibition  of increasing the amount of lease receivables
in exchange for a deferral of payment is because this is a form of Riha. The  basis  for  the  permissibility  of stipulating  that  a solvent  debtor should undertake  to make a payment to charity in case of default is that this is  similar to an undertaking to make a donation  that is approved by the Maliki  scholars,  notably  Abdullah  Ibn Nati'  and Muhammad Ibn Ibrahim  Ibn Dinar.o»
Changes  to the Ijarah Contract
■  The basis for allowing the lessor to sell the leased asset to a third party without the consent of the lessee  is  that the lessor  owns the asset and is acting within  the limits of his ownership without  affecting the right of the lessee  that is  materialised  in the usufruct.  If the ljarah expires,  enabling the buyer to take  possession  of the  asset is  sufficient to discharge  the seller from any responsibility  as to delivery in which case the buyer will own the asset excluding the right of the lessee to the usufruct  which is attached to the asset even if the ownership  is  transf zrred. The Shari'ah Supervisory  Board  of Al Rajhi Banking  and Investment  Corp., and the Shari'ah  Supervisory  Board of the Jordan  Islamic  Bank have  issued a resolution  in support  of this ruling.
The basis for the termination  of the lease  contract due to a total destruc• tion of the leased  asset is  that the rent is  in consideration  of the benefit of the leased  asset  and if the latter  is  destroyed,  there is  no justification for the payment of the rental.
■  The basis for the  entitlement  of the lessor  to the  rentals even  though
the lessee returns  the leased asset to the owner or stops using it is  that ljarah  is  a binding  contract  that cannot  be terminated   unilaterally  by the lessee.

(20)  International Islamic  Fiqh Academy Resolution No.  13 (1/3).
(21)  See: AI-Hattab,  "Tahrir Al-Kalam F Masa 'il Al-IItizam" (pp. 170). This view appeared in the Fatwas of Kuwait Finance  House.
(22)  Resolution  of the Shari'ah  Board of AI  Rahi Banking and Investment Corp. No.  (11).



262





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (9):  ljarah  and Ijarah  Muntahia  Bittamleek

The basis for  the permissibility of terminating the lease contract in case of intervening  contingencies  or force majeure is  that there is a pressing need which calls for this.  This is because if the contract were to be bin•
ding in spite of such contingencies,  then  a person  with a valid excuse may incur loss that was not a result of a contract. The Shari'ah Super• visory Board  of the Kuwait Finance House and  the unified  Shari'ah
Supervisory  Board of Al Baraka"  have issued  a supporting  Fatwa  in this regard.
+  The  basis for  the permissibility  that  the lessor  may stipulate  that  an
ljarah contract be terminated  due to non-payment  of rental by the lessee is that contractual  stipulations are primarily valid and enforceable. 'This stipulation does not legalise impermissible acts or invalidate permissible acts.  Therefore, the permissibility  of this stipulation  comes under  the prophetic  Hadith  stating:  Muslims  are  bound by  the  conditions  they made  except  a condition   that  legalises impermissible   act  or  invalidates permissible act",9
■  The basis of the rule that  ljarah  does not terminate  with the death ct either party thereto is  that the subject-matter  of the contract is  the asset and as long as the asset is available the ljarah contract remains unaffected. The basis for  the right  of the lessee's heirs to terminate  the ljarah if they can prove that the contract has become too onerous for their  resources  is to avoid inflicting damage on the heirs.  This exceptional ruling is taken
from the Mali.lei  School  of law since  it  serves the interests of the lessee.
The heirs of the lessor may not terminate  the ljarah in the event of the death of the lessor  because there is  no potential damage to them,  as they will receive the rentals for  the remainder  of  the term of the contract.
Transfer  of  the  Ownership  in the  Leased  Asset  in Ijarah  Muntahia
Bittamleek
The  basis  of the  rule  that  the  documents  of the  lessor's  promise  to sell  and the methods  of transfer  of ownership  be separated  from  the ljarah  contract  is to ensure  that the obligations  and  liabilities are not

(23)  Fatwas of the Sharl'ah  Board af Jordan  Islamic Bank  No. (18). (24)  Fatwa No.  (233)  and (253).
(25)  Fatwa No  (9/9)  of the Unified Shari'ah  Board.



263





Shari'ah Standard No.  (9):  ljarah  and Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek

linked  to  each  other.  The  International  Islamic  Fiqh  Academy  has issued a resolution  in this regard9
The  basis  for  the  rule  that  the promise  of a client  to  take  an  asset
acquired by the Institution  on lease is binding is that the Institution  has acquired the asset  in order to lease it to the client due to the promise. Therefore, the rule that the promise to take the asset on lease is binding will protect the promisee.
+  The basis for  not allowing bilateral promises  is  that  the resemblance
of these promises to a contract, i.e. a contract  is  effected before taking ownership  of the  subject  matter  of the  contract.  The  International Islamic Fiqh Academy has issued  a resolution  in this  regard.D
The basis for the permissibility  of a gift contingent  upon  the expiry of
the ljarah  term  is  that  a conditional  gift is  valid.  The  Prophet  (peace be upon him)  sent a gift to Negus (the  former emperor of Ethiopia)  on condition that he was alive at the time of the arrival of the messenger.( The basis  for the permissibility of leasing an asset to the  person  from whom it is purchased by way of Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek on condition that the parties  observe the lapse of a period of time is  that this prevents the  contract  from becoming  a 'Inah  transaction.  This  is   because the
physical changes to the asset or changes in the value of the asset during this period give it the economic characteristics of a different asset.
The basis for the requirement  that all the rules prescribed for an ordinary
lease are applicable to ljarah Muntahia  Bittamleek is  that a mere promise to transfer ownership does exclude the contract from becoming an ljarah contract  or from  the  applicable  rules.  This  requirement  is  necessary in order  to prevent a linking  of contracts  (the  sale  contract  and lease

(26)  This Hadith has been related by a number of companions. It was also related  by Ahmad in his Sunan" [1:  312]; Ibn  Majah in his  "Sunan" through a good chain of transmission [2:  783],  Mustafa AI-Babi Al-Halabi  edition,  Cairo, 1372  A.H./1952  A.D;  AI-Hakim in  Mustarak",  Edition of  Hyderabad, India,  1355  A.H;  A!Bayhaqi  in  his  Sunan"
(6:  70  and 156]  and [I:  133],  Edition af  Hyderabad,  India,  1355H;  and A!-Daraqutni
in his  "Sunan"  [4:  228]  and [3:  77],  Dar AI-Mahasin LilTiba'ah edition,  Cairo, 1372
A.H./1952 A.D.
(27)  Intenatioanl  Islamic fiqh  Academy  Resolution  No.  13  (1/3).
(28)  The Hadith has been related  by  bn  Hibban:   Sahih  Ibn  Hibban"   [1:  516];  and
Ahmad in his  Musnad [6:  404].



264





Shari' ah Standard  No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Muntahia  Bittamleek

contract). The International Islamic Fiqh Academy has issued a resolution
in support of this ruling."
The basis for  the  rule  that  ownership  cannot  be made  in  contingent on a future date is that a sale contract  cannot  be dependent  on a future date,  as the  term  'sale' means  that  its  effiect  ( transfer  of ownership) immediately  takes place.
■  The basis for allowing recourse to the prevailing market  rate ct rental
when the transfer of ownership  becomes impossible without  any cause attributable  to the lessee is  to protect  the lessee against any loss as the lessee has paid more than the prevailing rate ct rental in order to acquire title to the asset. If this acquisition  ct title becomes impossible,  then the rental must be adjusted retrospectively to the prevailing market rate.  This ruling  is  analogous to the principle  that the price must  be discounted when a sold  crop has suffered  damages due natural calamities.































(29)  See  Note (25).



265





Shani'ah Standard No (9):  larah  and Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek





Appendix (C)
Definitions


ljarah

The  term  ljarah  as used  in this  standard   means  leasing  of property pursuant to a contract  under  which a specified permissible  benefit  in the form of a usufruct is obtained  for a specified period in return for a specified permissible  consideration.
ljarah  Muntahia Bittamleek
One of the forms of ljarah used by Islamic financial Institutions is  ljarah Muntahia  Bittamleek.   This   is  a form  of leasing  contract  which  includes a promise by the lessor to transfer the ownership in the leased property to the lessee, either at the end of the term of the ljarah  period or by stages  during the term of the contract, such transf r of the ownership  being executed through one of the means specified in the Standard.


























266

























