







'
STANDARDS
Full  Text of Shari'ah  Standards  for  Islamic  Financial
Institutions  As at  Safar  14394.H.  -- November 2017 A.D.




























ACCOUNTING  AND AUDITING  ORGANIZATION FOR ISLAMIC  FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS













































SHARI' AH
STANDARDS







€ The  Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial Institutions, 2015

King Fahd National Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data
The Accounting and Auditing Organization fur Islamic Financial Institutions
Shari'ah Standards. / 'Ihe Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial
Institutions.-   Manama, 2015
1262p;  24x17  a
ISBN:  6-9616-01-603-978
-1  Finance (Islamic  Law)             ] Title
275.5 d             171/1437
L.D.  no,  168/1437
ISBN: 6-9616-01-603-978




B8AA0r1    ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING ORGANIZATION FOR ISLAMIC FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
PO. Box 1176, Manama, Kingdom af Bahrain Telephone:  (17375400 (973+ - Fr:  (17250194  (973+ E-mail:  inf @aaoifi.com
Website:  www.aaoif.com







Worldwide  Distribution: Dar AIMaiman for Publishing & Distributing
For online shopping, visit our website: www.daralmaiman.com For more information  Email us Info@daralmaiman.com Connect with us via twitter: @DarAlMaiman
Phone  :   +966 11   4627336     Fr   :   +966  11   4612163
Mobile :   +966 500004568      Moblle :   +966  505455097


No Unauthorized Photocopying
All rights  reserved for Accounting and Auditing  Organization for  Islamic Financial Institutions.  Without permission in writing,  no part of  this publication may be transla ted, reprinted or reproduced or utilized in any form either in whole or in part or by any electronic, mechanical or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying  and recording,  or in any information storage and retrieval system.

AAOIFI's Shari'ah Standards are published both in Arabic and English.  In case of  any difference between the two texts, the Arabic  text shall prevail.  Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial Institutions is not responsible for  any  negative consequences occasioned to any person acting or refraining from action as a result of any material in this publication due  to its usage.














SHARI' AH
STANDARDS
Full  Text of Shari'ah  Standards  for  Islamic  Financial
Institutions  as  at Safar  1437  A.H.  - December  2015  A.D.




















5A\0












Foreword by AAOIFI Secretary General


Praise be to Allah,  Lord  of the Worlds,  and Allah's blessings and peace be upon  the  noblest  of Messengers,  Prophet  Muhammad,   and  upon  his household and the companions, and those who follow their example with good conduct  until the Day of Judgment.
It  is of Allah's  Grace that He bestowed on us the great religion of Islam, and made  us  the  best Ummah  raised up for  mankind,  one that  is  graced with  the  noblest  of Prophets  and  Heavenly  Books  and  religious  codes. This  comprehensive  religious  code encompassed  and ordained  all things beneficial  to humankind   in this  life  and  in the Hereafter,  and prohibited and banned  all evils and vices,  as made clear in the Noble  Qur 'an:
{".. Today,  I have perfected your religion for you,  and completed My
favour upon you,  and have granted Islam  as a religion for you..'},(

One of the basic pillars of Islamic Faith is the belief in, and perseverance towards, the preservation of the well-being of people, and solid establishment of markets,  trade,  finances,  and to distance all of which  from prohibitions sanctioned in the Qur 'an and the Sunn ah;  namely, Riba, Gharar, gambling, illegal appropriation  of peoples'  wealth,  etc.  This  is  also embodied  in the keenness to observe prohibitions  in the area of financial transactions  and contracts, especially when  it  comes to honoring  obligations,  honesty  and straightforwardness,  mutual consent of contracting  parties,  and so on.

Based on this set of norms and values, the Islamic finance industry  was established  and  has attained  its  current  paramount  status, as  manifosted in its growth ct a pace greater than that of all other financial sectors. By so doing,  it will hopefully be a boon for all peoples  and nations of the world.

The cornerstone  of the Islamic  finance  industry  is,  and will always be, the adherence  to,  and compliance with, the rules and principles of Sharf'ah,

(I)  [AI-Ma' idah (The Table):  3]



5





Foreword  by AAOIFI Secretary General

under  the broader  collective reasoning  by prominent Shari'ah scholars  and jurists,  and based  on evidences  found  in the  Qur 'an  and  the  Sunnah,  in an attempt  to deduce  Shari'ah  rulings  that  fit current-day reality and prac• tices.

In this  regard, the volume  of  Shari'ah Standards has become  the major compilation of contemporary Fiqh reasoning in the area of Fiqh al-M uamalat (Jurisprudence of Financial  Transactions)  around  the globe.  The standards cover a large  array  of Islamic  financial  contracts and products,  including those pertaining to banking, Islamic insurance, investment  banking, capital markets,  financing,  and so on.

These standards have acclaimed wide popularity within the global Islamic finance  industry,  and  are deemed  the  most  outstanding  Shari'ah  reference for this  industry  and  its various stakeholders,  including legislative bodies, regulatory   authorities,   and  financial   institutions,   and  other   prof zssional entities such as law firms, accounting  and consultancy firms,  in addition  to universities,  academic  institutions  and  research  centers  and  Fatwa issuing bodies.

Currently, AAOIFI Standards are officially adopted by a number d central banks and financial  authorities on a mandatory  basis or as guidance.  Hence, these standards are viewed as a major hallmark for the Islamic fi nance industry and one of its principal accomplishments.

These standards would have not achieved such a prominence and outreach, with Allah's Grace and Guidance  first and  utmost,  had there  been no great efforts  exerted by the  Shari'ah  scholars and Fuqaha and a host of experts and professionals, volunteering a great deal of their time towards this great cause.
The success of these standards can be attributed to a set of factors, primarily the  thorough  scholarly   methodology  (the   due   process)   that   AAOIFI follows  in  its efforts  to develop  and issue the standards.  The development process is  carried  out through  more than  ten stages, commencing  with the commissioning of consultants to prepare  the exposure  drafts. The exposure draft  is   then   submitted  to the  respective  Shari'.ah  Standards  Committee which  discusses and reviews it, and then forwards it to the Sharf'ah  Board  to



6





Foreword  by AAOIFI Secretary General

further  discuss and review it,  coming  up with the draft standard.  The draft standard is then presented at a public hearing (one or more) where the Islamic finance  institutions  can  discuss  it  with  Fuqaha,  experts  and professionals hailing from these institutions in order to make certain  the draft standard  is meticulous  and of high quality, covering all practical  aspects and emerging practices  faced by  the  industry  practitioners.  The remarks  and comments presented  at the public  hearing  will be discussed  by  the Sharf'ah  Board  to introduce the changes it  deemed  suitable and finally adopt the standard.  At this stage,  the standard  is presented  to the drafting  committee  to edit its text for publication.

One of  the major strengths  of these standards  is  reflected in the collective efforts made by  the Shari'ah Board which consists of 20 prominent  Shari'ah scholars from around the world. This ensures globality and wide geographical outreach  of these standards  in addition  to accounting  for various localities, jurisdictions,  applications  and customary  practices,  etc.  The standards  also embody  the  scholarly  background   diversification  among  board  members, as all major  schools  of Islamic  Law are  duly  represented,  and  various specializations  are taken  into consideration  in its formation  (from  judiciary to Fatwa issuing,  consultancy,,  research,  authorship,  law,  and economic  and fi nancial advisory,  etc.).

These  standards   also  pay  special  attention   to  noting  down  classical Fiqh compendiums across ages,  in the area of fl nancial transactions,  select• ing the most  practical  and  convenient  out  of these  references, and giving preponderance to specific  rulings  in the form  of a classified  and  typified standard.  Furthermore, the standards account  for modern applications of Islamic  fi nancial  contracts  and  products   and  relevant  emerging  matters. They  also grant  special  consideration  to the  use of unified  terminology and  disambiguation  of its different  components  and  aspects:  technical, legal,  accounting, financial,  etc. Moreover,  the standards involve the pro• cess of deriving  Shari'ah  rulings  to address  all pertaining matters  and  to provide  guidance  to the process  of differentiation  between  impermissible and  permissible   transactions  and  practices  all in one  neat,  summarized compilation.

The Shari'ah  Board has made  incumbent  upon  itself, in view of the fast pace of development  and change in the Islamic finance industry,  to review



7





Foreword  by AAOIFI Secretary  General

existing standards. It formed  from amongst its members a special committee for that purpose.  The committee  reviews all remarks and comments  raised by scholars and  experts  on the  form  and substance  of the  standards.  The reviews, in a bid to address the industry's requirements as to emerging matters, have resulted  in three  classes of standards:  (I)  Standards  whose items and paragraphs  were updated  to  remove ambiguity  and clarify their  meanings and the rulings embedded  therein,  or to present  more precise  presentation of content and so on.  (II) Standards  to which new paragraphs were added or
existing paragraphs were merged or omitted, so that the general structure  of the standard  is  maintained.  (III) Standards which the board deemed in need of a new preparation  and development,  in order  to account for the sizable emerging matters and changes relating  to the topic  cf the standard  such as the Shari'ah  Standards  on Sukuk, Debit Card,  Charge Card and Credit Card, and so on. The development process for such standards  has commenced and is  under way.

The new version of AAOIFI Shari'ah  Standards  has included  a number of reviewed and revised standards (of types  l and 2, as mentioned above). These standards  are labeled  with a "Revised Standard"  designation.

We are ever thankful  to  Allah  that  issuance  of the  new version  in its elegant layout  has been  completed  both  in hardcopy  and digital  formats. A total of 15 new Shari'ah standards  have been translated  and added to the English volume.  As such, all Shari'ah  standards,  included  in this edition, have been issued both in Arabic and English. New standards are also under preparation  and are currently at different  stages of the due process.
The  newly translated   standards  that  have been  added  to this  edition went  through  three  extensive stages in  implementation   of proper quality control  measures. The first stage constituted institutional  efforts made by the International  Shari'ah  Research  Academy for Islamic  Finance  (ISRA)  and the Islamic Development  Bank  (IDB).  The second  stage involved  revision by  a legal expert  (lawyer) who examined  the translation from the angle cf accuracy and faithfulness  to the original text and legal vocabulary.  Finally, in the third  stage,  the Translation  Committee,  consisting  of the Honorable Chairman  of the Shari'ah  Board  and  four esteemed  members,  edited  and



8





Foreword by AAOIFI Secretary General

fine-tuned  the translation  through  ten meetings,  some of which spanned
3 successive   days.  Tb all of them,  we extend  our sincere  appreciation and best wishes.  I would also like to thank my colleague Mr. Mohammad Majd Bakir  (Corporate  Development  Manager,  AAOIFI)  for  his outstanding efforts to accomplish this project.
We warmly welcome your remarks and feedback, including errata, on existing standards  and your proposals as to new standards,  on our email: sharia@aaoifi.com

With sincere wishes and best regards,


Dr. Hamed Hassan Merah

23 Dhaul-Qal1ah,  1436 A.H.,  7 September 2015 A.D.





































9











Foreword by Shari'ah Boards  Chairman


Praise be to Allah,  Lord  of the Worlds,  and peace be upon  our  master Muhammad,  the last-sent  Prophet  and the leader of Prophets,  and on all his household  and the companions, and those who follow their example in good conduct  till the Day of Judgment.

As to what follows,

Islamic banking does  considerably differ from its conventional counterpart in terms  of principles,  norms,  values,  and practices.  The specialty of Islamic banking  and the soundness  of its transactions  must  be  clearly reflected in accounting treatments so that no confusion arises, and no mistakes are committed  in practice.  Conventional  accounting  cannot serve the purpose, as it is  based co a different  set  of norms  and values.  Therefore,  it was vital that Islamic banks and financial institutions (IFis) have their own accounting standards, rather titan conventional ones. The development cf the standards was  and  is  still a gigantic  task that  draws on the  great  efforts  exerted  by Shari'ah scholars and professional experts alike. Since inception in 1411 A.H. (corresponding  to  1991  A.D.),  AAOIFI has been exerting a lot  di efforts  in
the preparation  di accounting standards for Islamic financial institutions and
auspiciously the standards have been well received by the  industry, especially in the area oflslamic banking where Islamic banks follow them ona mandatory basis or as guidance,  based on regulatory  enforcement  by central banks  in many countries  around  the globe.  Subsequently,  AAOIFI  decided  to issue Shari'ah  standards  in the same  way it had issued its accounting standards,  in order to  provide a reference for Islamic banks and fi nancial  institutions  to comply with  Shari'ah  in  their transactions  and products  and to harmonize various  Fatwas  issued  by  different Shari'ah Supervisory  Boards  (SSBs).  To that end, AAOIFI formed its  Shari'ah  Board in 1419  A.H.  (corresponding  to
1999  A.D.)  consisting  of Sharf'ah  scholars versed with Fiqh  al-Muaamalat
(Islamic  commercial   and  financial  jurisprudence),   especially  in  the  area



10





Foreword by Shari'ah Board's Chairman

of Islamic  banking.  The  Board,  with Allah's  Grace,  has managed  to  issue more  than 54 standards   hitherto,  covering  a wide array  of Shari'ah  rules pertaining   to financial  transactions   of Islamic financial  institutions   (IFIs). These  standards  have become  a reliable reference  for  the Islamic banking
industry,  and an essential part ct academic curricula  in universities, colleges
and schools  offering education  on Islamic banking.

The Board  exerts due diligence  to develop these standard's  through  the due process  which  initiatives  with commissioning of a consultant/scholar knowledgeable  in the area relevant to the topic of the standard. An additional study will be conducted  to take into consideration  all relevant issues  in light of the Noble Qur 'an, the Sunn ah,  and major schools  of Islamic  Law, setting out  Shari'ah  basis and  newly emerging  matters  along with contemporary Fiqh views. Then, an exposure draft is prepared  for the prospective standard. The study and exposure draft will be submitted to a committee  formed from
amongst the Board members  in addition  to a number ct external, specialized
scholars.  For that purpose,  the Board  formed four committees  that convene to review the exposure  draft  and  prepare  it  for  submission  to the Shari'ah Board.  The Board  used to convene every week and other  week in Makkah Al-Mukarramah  and  Al-Madinah   Al-Munawwarah,  in turns.  It currently convenes only four times a year at least, two in the Two Holy Cities, and two elsewhere.

Afterward, the exposure drafts reviewed by the committees  are discussed line in line out in the Board's meetings in a deliberate and unhindered  manner, until  a  standard  is  adopted   based  on  consensus   or  the  opinion   of the majority.  Thereafter,  AAOIFI holds a public hearing  to present  and discuss
the proposed  standard  with a host of scholars  and practitioners who voice
their  views and opinions,  whether  in  the form  of deletions,  additions,  or amendment. The fedback will be presented  to the Board again in its  next meeting for discussion. This will represent  an opportunity for the Board to discuss the standard  for the last  time before issuance,  where  it can add or delete or amend it as deemed  appropriate after extensive discussions. At this stage, the due process completes  and the standard  is  officially adopted  and issued.



11





Foreword by Shari'ah  Board's Chairman

In this regard, two important facts are worth  noting;

First,  these  standards  are issued  by the Board,  not  by an individual  or an ad-hoc  group of individuals.  Hence, the rulings  and provisions  reached at in the  standards  shall  not  be attributed  to  a specific  member   in  his personal   capacity.  The  Board  follows a professional  methodology as do most  similar  international bodies.  Its decisions  are taken  by the majority of members,   while  those  members   with  opposing  views or  reservations will be referred  to along with their views or reservations  in the minutes of meetings. The  decisions  will be issued under  the name  of the Board  and points  of incongruity will not be mentioned. Most of the provisions  in the standards   issued 'by  the Board  are typically  agreed  on by all members.  It is not  unusual,  however,  that  diffierent points of view often  emerge  as to rulings  developed  on the basis cf reasoning  (ljtihad),  especially in relation to new  occurrences and  issues  (Nawazil).  If incongruity on  some  issues lingers  on  after  open  deliberations,  the  Board  would  take  its  decisions based  on  the  majority  of views,  and  the points  of incongruity would  be noted  down  in the  minutes  as is  the  usual  procedure without   referring thereto  in the body of the standard.

Second,  despite the above-mentioned  steps followed by the Board in its keenness  to  take  prudent   measures  in  the  process  of standards   issuance, this  all remains  a human  endeavor  that is  fallible  by nature,  where mistakes and oversight  are not completely ruled  out,  and inf »llibility  only belongs to Prophets and Messengers (peace be upon them). Therefore, the Board formed a  review committee  to look into its existing standards.  Should a mistake or oversight be pinpointed,  or should there be any suggestion for  improvement
of the  standards,  we  would  be  thankful  to  receive  feedback  from  scholars
(please  address  them  to  AAOIFTs  General  Secretariat,  which  will submit them in tum  to the Board  through  the review committee,  Allah's Willing)

Lastly,  I would like to extend  my appreciation to all Board  members  for their  invaluable  efforts and contributions to the realization  of this splendid achievement,  purely  dedicated  to Allah,  and  also for  the  spirit  of under• standing they exhibited during  constructive  scholarly deliberations. I would also like to  thank  AAOIFI  for  its  remarkable   initiative  embodied   in this



12





Foreword by Shari'ah Board's Chairman

outstanding  accomplishment  and for its unwavering efforts to support  and facilitate the errand  ct the Board  as it saved no means to arrange  the Board's meetings, to iron  out all obstacles and difficulties, and to follow up on the Board's  resolutions  and communicate  them  to all parties  concerned.  I  do
supplicate to Allah to amply reward all those who sincerely contributed  to•
wards this work, and I pray that Allah accept it and extend its  benefits to
people everywhere.

And praise be to Allah,  first and foremost,

Muhammad Taqi Usmani









































13












Table of Contents



Subject                                                                                       Page

Foreword by AAOIFI Secretary  General..............................................            5
Foreword by Shari'ah  Board's  Chairman......ass.sass.sass·ss.sass·a...6ass,           10

Introduction..........................................................................................          19
Organizational Structure..............................................................................          26

Shari'ah  Standards
1.   SS  (1):  Trading in Currencies................................................................          47
2SS  (2):  Debit Card,  Charge Card and Credit Card...............................          67
3.  SS  (3):  Procrastinating Debtor................................................................          83
4.  SS  (4):  Settlement of Debt by Set-Off.....................................................        103
5.  SS  (5):  Gu a ran tees....................................................................................        119
6.   SS  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional Bank  to an Islamic  Bank.....          147
7.  SS  (7):  Hawalah.........................................................................................        171
8.  SS  (8):  Murabahah....................................................................................        195
9.  SS  (9):  ljarah and Ijarah  Muntahia Bittamleek.....................................        233
IO.  SS  (10):  Sa1am and Parallel  Salam............................................................        267
11.   SS (11):  Istisna'a  and Parallel  lstisna'a.....................................................        291
12.  SS  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah)  and Modern Corporations............        32l
13.  SS  (13): Mudarabah...................................................................................        365
14.  SS  (14):  Documentary Credit.................................................................        391
15.  SS  (15):  Ju'.alah...........................................................................................        421
16.  SS  (16):  Commercial Papers....................................................................        439
17.  SS  (17)  Investment Sukuk ...........s.so.sos.coos.o.coo.so.o.so...so............      463
18.  SS  (18):  Possession (Qabd)......................................................................        489

19.  SS  (19):  Loan (Qard)................................................................................        513
20.  SS  (20):  Sale of Commodities in Organized Markets..........................        535



15





Table  of Contents


21.   S3  (21):  Financial  Paper (Shares  and Bonds)....................a............

22.  S3  (22):  Concession  Contracts.............so........sos.s...sass.s.so.a...s..o..
23.  SS (23):  Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned  Agent (Fodooli) ..

24,  SS (24):  Syndicated Financing......«oo»sos»ass«oooso»so»sos+so»so.
25.   SS(25):  Combination  of Contracts.............................a....a..........a......

26,   5S  (26)  Islamic Insurance ..............sos.sos.sos.sos.so.so.so.so.o

27.   $S (27)  Indices.~                                                                                      .
28.   SS  (28):  Banking  Services  in Islamic  Banks...........................................
29.  SS   (29):  Stipulations  and Ethics of Fatwa in the Institutional  Frame•
work oi: i•i,ii,iili'ii■i+ii iii+ iliitH: itt i•·· ··,...., ···:i- ii,i i-i U i,ii ,ii,ii,H •ii •,.. i■ ..... " •••• i, ....i,. .U --i, iii,H, ii ,i,. i-iiiii•'"' •i•
30.   SS  (30):  Monetization  (Twarruu) ........so.sssss«sass.sos.sos.a.sos.sos..

31.   SS  (31):  Controls on  Gharar  in Financial Transactions  .......................

32SS  (32):  Arbitration  .......ours«so o n+so+ o rs+s o ns+ o r «o r + roe+ or +soo n +a+so+ ·

33.   SS  (33):  Waqf            ~                                                                                                                                                               .

34.  5SS   (34):  Hiring of Persons .........................a.s.as.....................·
35.   SS  (35):  Zakah                                                                                       ..
36.   SS  (36):  Impact of Contingent  Incidents  on Commitments................
37,   SS  (37):  Credit Agreement  .......o»so»sos»sos«sou»sos»so»so»a+

38.   SS  (38):  Online Financial  Dealings.....arm»moo.ammo..

39.   SS  (39):  Mortgage and its Contemporary Applications.....................
40.  SS  (40):  Distribution   of  Profit   in  Mudarabah-Based    Investment
Accounts      ,.                                                                                           m••········..·······•··· ..·•..·····
41.  SS  (4l)  Islamic Reinsurance..........sssssssssssssssssssssssosssssssssssosssssssss·
42.  SS (42):  Financial   Rights and  How  They Are Exercised and Trans-
fined   ._...............................                                           "'"....


44.  SS  (44):  Obtaining  and  Deploying Liquidity..........coo.a.a.a.a.........
45.  SS  (45):  Protection  of Capital and Investments .....................a...............
46.  SS  (46):  Al-Wakalah Bi  Al-lstithmar  (Investment  Agency).................

47.  SS  (47):  Rules for Calculating  Profit  in Financial Transactions        .
48.  SS   (48):  Options  to Terminate  Due to Breach of Trust  (Trust-Based
555
583
605

629

647

673

701
719

733

753

767
789

809

839
865
905

921

943
963

989
1013



1061

1083
1097

1115

1133
Options i                  i                     ,.. •••• ,.,                           ii·•··""i"r.•l-•• ..·i••••+••r.•• ..·••  ·•·          .,................           1145
49.  SS  (49):  Unilateral  and Bilateral Promise...........ass...a.a.a.a......a......      1159




16





Ta ble  of Contents


50. SS (50):  Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat)...............................................      1175
51. SS (51):  Options to Revoke Contracts Due to Incomplete Performance..      1197
52. S$ (52):  Options O Reconsider (Cooling-Off Options, Either-Or Options,
and Options to Revoke Due to Non-Payment)................a..a.........      1213
53. SS (53):  'Arboun (Earnest Money)............................................................      1231

54. SS (54):  Revocation of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option..      1245

Overview: Publication  Sponsor............................................................       1259














































17































Introduction












Introduction


The Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial Insti• tutions (AAOIFI),  formerly known as Financial Accounting  Organization for Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions, was established  in accordance with the Agreement of Association which was signed  by Islamic  financial institutions on 1  Safar  1410 A.H.,  corresponding to 26 February 1990 A.D., in Algiers.  AAOIFI was registered  on 11  Ramadan 1411  A.H., corresponding to  27 March 1991  A.D., in the Kingdom of Bahrain as an international auton• omous non-profit  making corporate body:.

Objectives of AAOIFI are:
1.   To develop accounting  and auditing thoughts  relevant to Islamic financial  institutions;
2  To disseminate   accounting and auditing thoughts relevant  to Islamic financial institutions  am their applications through training,  seminars, publication   of periodical  newsletters,  carrying out and commissioning of research  and other means;
3.   To prepare, promulgate and interpret accounting and auditing standards for Islamic financial institutions;  and
4.  To review and amend accounting and auditing standards for Islamic financial institutions.
AAOIFI carries  out these objectives  in accordance with the precepts of Islamic  Shari'ah  which represents  a comprehensive  system  for all aspects of life, in conformity with the environment in which Islamic financial institutions have  developed.  This  activity is  intended   both to enhance the confidence of users  of the  financial statements of Islamic  fi nancial  institutions  in the information that is  produced about these institutions, and to encourage these users  to invest  or deposit their funds in Islamic  financial institutions  and to use their services.
Before the establishment of AAOIFI, intensive efforts were made on both administrative  and technical levels  beginning with the working paper that



21





Introduction

was presented by the Islamic Development Bank during the annual meeting of its board of governors in Istanbul in March 1987.  Thereafter, a number  of committees were formed to examine the appropriate  methods  of preparing accounting  standards  for  Islamic financial  institutions.  These committees produced  several research studies and reports.

Since   its  establishment  in  1411  A.H.,  corresponding  to  1991  A.D.  and until 1415 A.H., corresponding  to 1995 A.D., the organizational structure of AAOIFI comprised the Supervisory  Committee which consisted of seventeen members,  the  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  which  consisted  of twenty one members,  an Executive Committee  appointed  from within  the members of the Standards  Board,  and a Shari'ah  Committee of four  members.

After four years of work,  the Supervisory  Committee  decided  to form a review committee to look into the statute Of AAOIFI and its organizational structure. The amendments that were later introduced  in the statute, which were approved  by the Supervisory  Committee,  included  the  renaming  of the  Organization   and  the  changing  of its  organizational   structure.  The revised  structure  consisted  of a  General  Assembly, a  Board  of Trustees (which replaced the supervisory  committee), an Accounting  and Auditing Standards  Board  (which  replaced  the former  board  that was confined  to accounting   standards  only),  an  Executive  Committee,  a  Shari'ah  Board and a General Secretariat  to be headed by a Secretary-General.

The  amendment   of the  statute  also included  changing  the method  of financing  AAOIFI.  In  the  past,  AAOIFI  was  financed  by  contributions paid by the founding  members  (Islamic Development  Bank,  Dar Al-Maal Al-Islami  Group,  Al  Rajhi  Banking  & Investment  Corporation,  Dallah Al Baraka  and  Kuwait  Finance  House).  The  revised  statute  calls for the establishment  of a Waqf (endowment)  and charity fund to be financed from membership  fee that is paid only once by institutions  joining AAOIFI. The proceeds  from  this fund,  the annual  subscription  fees,  grants,  donations,
bequests and others are the sources  from which  AAOIFI funds its activities.

(I)  These studies  and reports are compiled infive volumes and were lodged  in the library of the Islamic  Research and Training Institute  of the Islamic  Development   Bank in Jeddah  - Saudi  Arabia   under serial  no.  (332/121021).



2





Introd uction

The amendment ct the statute  also included  changing  the membership
Of AAOIFI. It consisted  of:

■  Founding  members,
Non-founding members,
■  Observing  members.

Attached  is  an updated  list of AAOIFI's members.

In  1419  A.H.,  corresponding to  1998 A.D.,  additional amendments were  made   in AAOIFI's   statute.  These  amendments  included,  among other things,  the  broadening Of AAOIFIs objectives. Article (4)  of the amended statute  states  that  AAOIFI  shall:
1.    Develop  the  accounting,  auditing  and  banking   practices  thought relating  to the activities  of Islamic financial  institutions.
2   Disseminate  the  accounting and  auditing   thought  relating to  the activities   of  Islamic   financial  institutions  and  their   applications through  training,  seminars,  publication  of periodical  newsletters, preparation of research  and other  means.
3.   Prepare, promulgate  and interpret  accounting  and auditing  standards for Islamic financial institutions in order to harmonize  the accounting practices  adopted  by  these  institutions  in  the  preparation  of their financial statements, as well as to harmonize  the auditing  procedures adopted   in  auditing   the  financial  statements   prepared   by  Islamic financial  institutions.
4.   Review and amend  the accounting  and auditing standards for Islamic fi nancial institutions to  cope  with  developments  in the  accounting and auditing  thought  and practices.
5.  Prepare, issue, review and adjust the statements  and guidelines  on the banking,  investment  and insurance  practices  ct the Islamic financial institutions.
6.  Approach  the concerned  regulatory  bodies,  Islamic financial  institu• tions, other  financial  institutions that offer Islamic financial  services, and accounting and auditing firms in order to implement  the accoun• ting and auditing standards, as well as the statements and guidelines on the  banking,  investment  and insurance  practices  ct Islamic financial
institutions  that are published by AAOIFI.



23





Introd uction

The amendments  also included the renaming ct non-founding members to be "Associate Members".  Article  (3)  of the amended  statute  states that associate members shall comprise the following:
1.   Islamic financial  institutions  that comply with Islamic Shari'ah  rules
and principles  in all their transactions.
2.   Regulatory and supervisory authorities  that supervise Islamic financial institutions.  Regulatory and  supervisory  authorities  include  central banks,  monetary agencies and other similar  authorities.
3.   Islamic Fiqh academies and authorities  that have corporate  entity. The Observing  Members  shall comprise the following:
1.   Organizations and associations responsible for regulating the accoun•
ting and auditing  profossion  and/or  those  responsible  for preparing accounting  and auditing  standards.
2.   Practicing certified accounting and auditing firms that have interest in the accounting and auditing practices of Islamic financial  institutions.
3.   Financial institutions  engaged in fi nancial activities of Islamic insti•
tutions.
4.  Users of financial  statements  of Islamic fl nancial institutions  both individual  and corporate.
The conditions  of membership   specified in Article (8)  of the amended statute stipulate that every member  should pay the prescribed  membership fe  and the  annual  subscription   fee  A member  should  also comply with AAOIFTs  statute and bylaws.

The amendment of the statute also included  the formation  of a Shari'ah Board  instead  of Shari'ah  Committee.  Details  of the  Shari'ah  Board  are shown below in the organizational  structure.

In  1425  A.H, corresponding  to 2004 A.D., additional  amendments  were made  in AAOIFTs  statute.  These  amendments included   expanding   the membership  category to include supporting members,  which comprise users of financial statements of Islamic financial institutions both individuals and corporate. It also comprises all the local and international financial institutions that already have or intend  to have relations with Islamic financial institutions' products.





Introd uction

The changes also include AAOIFI ability to offer a testing and certification programme  in the  areas of accounting,  auditing,  financial  analysis,  and Islamic banking,  conducted  either by AAOIFI or in cooperation  with other parties.



















































25





Introd uction





Organizational  Structure


a)  General  Secretariat

The General Secretariat consists of the Secretary-General and the technical and administrative units.  The Secretary-General  is the executive  director Of  AAOIFI.   He  coordinates  the  activities   of  General   Assembly,  the Board  of Trustees, the  Standards  Board,  Shari'ah  Board,  the  Executive Committee  and  the  subcommittees  and  acts  as  their   rapporteur.  He runs  the  day-to-day  affairs  and  activities  as  well as coordinating  and supervising the studies related to the preparation of statements, standards and guidelines  promulgated by AAOIFI.  The responsibilities of the Secretary-General also include  strengthening ties between  AAOIFI  and other  organizations and  representing AAOIFI  at conferences, seminars and scientific  meetings.

b)  Board  of Trustees

The  Board  of Trustees  is  composed  of nineteen  part-time  members, in addition  to  the Secretary  General,  who  are appointed  by:  the  General Assembly for a five-year term.  Members  of the Board  of Trustees represent the   following  various   categories:   regulatory  and   supervisory  bodies, Islamic  fl nancial institutions,  Shari'ah   Supervisory  Boards,  organizations and associations  responsible  for regulating  the accounting  prof ession  and/ or responsible  for preparing  accounting  and  auditing  standards, certified accountants,  and  users  of the  financial  statements  of  Islamic  financial institutions.  The  conditions   of electing  these  members   are  specified  in Article (11) of the statute.
The  Board  of Trustees  meets  at least  once a year.  With  the  exception of the proposals  to amend  the statute  of AAOIFI which  requires  the vote of three  quarters  of the  members  of the  Board  of Trustees,  decisions  in all matters  before the Board are adopted  by the majority  of the members voting.  In case of a tie,  the Chairman  shall have the casting vote.



26





Introd uction

The  powers  of the  Board  of Trustees  include,  among  others,  the fol•
lowing:

I.   Appointment of members   Of AAOIFI's  Boards  and  termination  of
their membership,  in accordance  with the provisions  of the statute.
2.   Arrangement of sources  of finance  for  AAOIFI  and investing those resources.
3.   Appointment of two  members from  amongst  the  members of the
Board  of Trustees  to the Executive  Committee.
4.  Appointment of the Secretary-General.

Notwithstanding the provisions  of the statute  concerning   the Board of Trustees'  powers  and authorities,  neither  the Board of Trustees  nor any of its  sub-committees  including  the  Executive  Committee,  has the  right  to interfere  directly or indirectly  in the work of the other  Boards  Of AAOIFI or influence  them  in any manner  whatsoever.
c)  Executive Committee

The Executive Committee  is  composed  of five  members:  The Chairman and one member  from  of the Board cf Trustees, the Secretary General,  the Chairman of the Accounting and Auditing Standards Board and the Chairman of the Shari'ah  Board.  The Executive Committee  has the power to discuss,
among other things,  the work plan,  the annual  budget,  financial statements, and the report af the external auditor.  The Executive Committee  also has the power to approve the employment bylaws and financial regulations of AAOIFI. The Executive Committee  meets at least twice at the request cf the Secretary• General or as and when required at the request of either its Chairman  or the Seer etary-General.
d) General Assembly

The General Assembly is  composed  of all  founding  and associate mem• bers, members representing regulatory and supervisory authorities, observer members and supporting  members.  Observer and supporting  members have the right  to participate in the meetings of the General Assembly but without a right to vote. The General Assembly is  the supreme authority and convenes at least once a year.





Introd uction

e)   Shari'ah  Board
The Shari'ah  Board is composed f not more than twenty members to be appointed  by the Board of Trustees for a four-year term from among Fiqh scholars who represent Shari'ah  Supervisory Boards in the Islamic financial
institutions that are members Of AAOIFI,  and Sharf'ah  supervisory  boards in central banks,  in  addition to the Secretary  General.
The powers of the Shari'ah  Board  include,  among others, the following:

I.  Achieving harmonization and convergence  in the concepts  and ap• plication  among  the Sharf'ah  Supervisory  Boards of Islamic finan• cial  institutions  to  avoid  contradiction  or  inconsistency  between the Fatwas and applications  by these institutions, thereby providing a pro-active  role  for  the  Shari'ah  Supervisory  Boards  of Islamic financial  institutions and central  banks.
2   Helping  in the development of Sharf'ah  approved instruments,  thereby
enabling Islamic  financial  institutions to cope with the developments taking place in instruments and formulas  in fields ct finance,  investment and other banking services.
3.   Examining  any inquiries  ref erred  to the Shari'ah  Board from Islamic
financial  institutions   or  from  their  Shari'ah  Supervisory  Boards, either  to give  the  Shari'ah  opinion  in  matters  requiring  collective ljtihad  (reasoning),  or to settle divergent  points of view,  or to act as an arbitrator.
4.   Reviewing the standards which AAOIFI issues  in accounting,  auditing
and code ct ethics  and related  statements throughout the various  stages ct the due process, to ensure that these issues  are  in compliance with the rules and principles oflslamic  Shari'.ah.
f) Accounting  and Auditing  Standards Board
The  Standards  Board is  composed  of twenty  part-time  members  who are appointed  by the Board  of Trustees for  a four-year  term,  in addition to  the Secretary  General.  Members  of the Standards  Board  represent  the following various  categories:  Regulatory  and supervisory  bodies,  Islamic
financial  institutions,  Shari'ah  Supervisory  Boards,  university  prof essors, organizations  and  associations  responsible  for  regulating  the accounting



28





Introd uction

profession and/or  responsible  for preparing accounting and auditing standards,  certified  accountants,  and users  of the financial  statements of Islamic financial  institutions.
The powers of the Standards  Board include,  among others, the following:

1.   To prepare,  adopt and interpret  accounting  and auditing statements, standards and guidelines for Islamic financial institutions.
2.   To prepare and adopt code of ethics and educational standards  related to the activities of Islamic financial institutions.
3.   'To review with the aim of making additions, deletions or amendments
to any accounting  and auditing statements, standards  and guidelines.
4.   To prepare and adopt the due process fa- the preparation  of standards, as well  as regulations and bylaws of the Standards  Board.
The Standards Board meets it least  twice every year and its resolutions are adopted by the majority of the votes of the members voting. In case of a tie, the Chairman ct the Standards  Board  shall have the casting vote.
































29




Introduction



Board of Trustees
NAME             POSITION                   STATUS H.E  Shaikh Ebrahim Bin  Khalifa    Former  Minister of Housing,     Chairman
Al Khalifa                                       Kingdom of Bahrain
H. E. Sheikh   Saleh  Abdullah           President,  Dallah  Al Baraka             Deputy

Kamel
Group,  Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia

Chairman
Tan  Sri  Dr.  Munir Majid                    Chairman, Bank Muamalat,         Member
Malaysia
,-
Mr. Ahmed al Gebali                      Director, Islamic                           Member
Development Bank
Mr.  Shadi Zahran                             Group Chief Financial  Officer,     Member
- Kuwait Finance  House
H.  E Muliaman  D Hadad              rChairman, Fi...nancial Services       Member
Authority of Indonesia
Executive Director, Banking
Mr.  Khalid Hamad                          Supervision,  Central Bank of       Member
Bahrain
Mr.  Saeed Ahmed                            Deputy Governor, State Bank     Member of Pakistan
Mr.  Abdulmohsen  Abdulaziz Al-     Chief Executive Officer,
Fares                                                        Alinma Bank, Kingdom of          Member
Saudi Arabia
Chief Executive  Officer, Abu
Mr.  Tirad M. Mahmoud                  Dhabi Islamic  Bank,  United          Member
Arab Emirates
Mr.  Abdulbasit Ahmed A  Al-            Chief Executive Officer, Qatar
Shaibei                                                  International  Islamic  Bank,           Member
Qatar
President  & Chief Executive
Mr. Irfan Siddiqui                            Officer, Meezan Bank,                   Member
Pakistan
Head of Islamic Banking
Mr.  Abdulrazak Mohammed           Development Group,  National    Member
Elkhraijy                                             Commercial Bank,  Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia





30





Introd uction


Sh.  Dr. Sayyed Mohammad Al•        Shari'ah  Scholar,  Kuwait               Member
Sayyid Abdul Razzaq Al- Tabtaba'e
Sh.  Yousif Khalawi                          Shari'ah Scholar, Kingdom of      Member
Saudi Arabia
-                                                  -
Former Managing Partner,
Mr. Noor ur Rahman Abid              Auditing and Assurance                  Member
Business Services, Middle East,
EY, Kingdom  of Bahrain
Chairman, Maayer
Consulting and Auditing,

Mr.  Ahmad Fayez Al Shamsi            United Arab Emirates {and           Member former Chief Financial
Officer,  Emirates Islamic
Bank)
-
Member of the Board, Central
Bank of the Republic of
Prof.  Dr.  Necdet Sensoy                    Turkey (and former Professor       Member
of Accounting in Universities
- in Malaysia and Turkey)
Dr.  Hamed Hassan Merah              Secretary General, AAOIFI         Member &
Rapporteur



Secretary-General


Dr.  Hamed Hassan Merah





















31




Introduction



Shari'ah Board

NAME                                     POSITION                          STATUS Vice-President Darul-Uloom Karachi,
Sheikh Muhammad Taqi     Pakistan, and Permanent Member,           Chairman
Usmani                              OIC  Fiqh Academy, Jeddah,  Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia
-                                         --              -
Sheikh Abdulla Bin             Member,  Council of Senior Scholars,          Deputy
Sulaiman  Al Manea           and Advisor to the Royal Court,              Chairman
-  -Kingdom  of Saudi  Arabia                 -
President and General Secretary of the
Sheikh  Dr.  Abdul Sattar      Unified Shari'ah  Board  of Al Baraka           Member
AbuGhuddah                     Banking Group,  Kingdom of Saudi
..A...rabia
International Expert and Advisor,
Sheikh  Dr.  Hussein              Chairman and Member of IFIs' Shari'ah        Member
Hamid Hassan                   Supervisory Boards, Arab  Republic  of
Egypt

Member,  Council of Senior Scholars,
Sheikh Abdulla Bin             and Member,  Permanent Committee            Member
Mohamed Al Mutlaq         of Ifta, and Advisor to the Royal  Court,
Kingdom  of Saudi Arabia

Sheikh  Dr.  Ahmad Ali         Secretary General, The Higher
Abdulla                                 Council of the Shari'ah  Supervisory           Member
-B-o-ard,  Sudan                                      -
Chairman  and Member,  IFIs'  Shari'ah
Sheikh Nizam Yaquby         Supervisory  Boards,  Kingdom of              Member
Bahrain
a
Sheikh Dr.  Mohamed Ali    Chairman and Member,  IFIs' Shari'ah        Member
Al Qari                                   Supervisory  Boards, Saudi  Arabia
-                    -
Sheikh Dr. Yousef                 Chairman and Member,  IFI's  Shari'ah
Abdullah AI-Shubaily       Supervisory Board, Bank Albilad,            Member
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia





32





Introduction


Senior  Mufti, Supreme  Committee of Sheikh  Dr. Ahmed  Bin         Iftaa, DLrector,  Dar Al Iftaa, Department Abdulaziz  Al Hadad            of Islamic  Affairs and Charitable
Activities United Arab Emirates

Sheikh  Dr. Mahmoud Al    Chairman,  Shari'ah  Supervisory
Sartawi                                   Board,  Jordan  Islamic Bank, Jordan

Sheikh Dr. Ayashi                Shari'ah  Advisor,  Islamic Development
Faddad                                   Bank


Member




Member


Member

Sheikh  Dr.  Esam 'Anezi       Chairman,  Shari'ah  Supervisory                  Member
Board,  Investment  Dar, Kuwait.

Sheikh Dr.  Mohammed      Executive Director,  The International
Shari'ah  Research  Academy for Islamic      Member
Akram Laldin
Finance,


Sheikh  Waleed  Bin  Hadi
Head of Shari'ah  Compliance,  Qatar
Islamic Bank,  Qatar

Member


Sheikh Aflah Alkahalili
Head of Studies and Research,  Grand
Mufti Office, Sultanate  of Oman

Member

Mr.  Abdulla  Bin                      Member,  Ulama Society,  Yemen                   Member
Humood  Al Ezzi

Sheikh  Mohsen  Al               Member,  Shari'ah  Supervisory  Board,        Member
Asfoor                                    Ithmaar  Bank,  Kingdom af Bahrain

Dr.  Hamed  Hassan               Secretary -General,  AAOIFI                        Member&
Merah                                                                                                           Rapporteur


















33





Introd uction



Former Shariah Board Members

Sheikh  Prof.  Dr.  Wahbe Mustafa al
Zuhaili

Sheikh Abdul  Razzaq Naser
Mohammed

Sheikh  Prof.  Dr. Nazih  Hammad


Sheikh  Ghazali Bin  Abdul Rahman

Sheikh Yousif Mohammed  Mahmoud    Sheikh  Dr. Abdul Rahman  Bin Saleh Al
Qasi.m                                                          Atram

Sheikh  Dato Hajj Mohammed
Hashim  Bin Yehia


Sheikh YusufTalal  De Lorenzo


Sheikh  Dr.  Mohammad  Daud Baler
Sheikh  Prof.  Dr.  Alsidiq Mohammed  Al
Dharir

Sheikh  Prof.  Dr.  Ali Mohi Eldinne
Alqoradaghi


Sheikh  Mohammed  Ali Taskhiri


Sheikh  Dr.  Mohammed  Abdul Rahim
Sultan  Al Ulama

Sheikh  Dr.  Saleh  Bin  Abdulla
Lihaidan

Sheikh  Prof.  Dr. Ajeel  Jasim  Al-Nashmi

























34





Introd uction



Shariah Standards Review Committee
NAME            POSITION               I STATU5
President and General
Secretary of the Unified
Sheikh Dr. Abdul  Sattar Abu
Ghuddah




Sheikh  Dr.  Ayashi  Faddad

Shari'ah  Board of Al Baraka Banking Group,  Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
TShari'ah  Advisor,  Islamic
]Development Bank, Saudi
Arabia
[sad «sart»h  comic,]

Member





Member
Sheikh Waleed  Bin Hadi


Sheikh  Dr. Yousef Abdullah Al•
I Qatar Islamic Bank, oatar        [    Member

Member,  Shari'ah Supervisory

Shu baily
Board,  Bank Albilad, Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia
Member
--~11----


Sheikh  Dr. Esam 'Anezi



Dr.  Hamed Hassan Merah
Chairman, Shari'ah
Supervisory Board,  In vestment
Dar,  Kuwait.

Secretary-General,  AAOIFI


Member



Member























35





Introduction



Shari'ah Standards Drafting Committee


NAME                                      POSITION                        STATUS

President and General Secretary of the
Sheikh Dr. Abdul Sattar        Unified Shari'ah Board of Al Baraka      Member
AbuGhuddah                      Banking Group,  Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia

Sheikh Dr.  Mohamed Ali     Chairman and Member of IF Is'
Al Qari                                  Shari'ah Supervisory Boards,                    Member
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

Sheikh Dr. Yousef                Member,  Shari'ah Supervisory Board,
Abdullah AI-Shubaily            Bank Albilad,  Kingdom of Saudi               Member
Arabia



































36





Introd uction



Shari'ah Standards Translation Committee
NAME             POSITION               I STATU5

Vice-President, Darul-Uloom       []
Sheikh Muhammad Taqi
Karachi,  Pakistan, and Permanent   Ch:
Usmani
Member, OIC F.qh  Academy,
arman
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia               -1   ---

Sheikh  Nizam Yaquby



Sheikh  Dr.  Mohamed Ali Al
Qari


Sheikh Essam Mohammed
Ishaq
Chairman and Member of IFIs'
Shari'ah  Supervisory  Boards,
Kingdom of Bahrain

Chairman and Member of IFis' Shari'ah Supervisory Boards, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
--+--
Shari'ah Advisor & Board
Member, Discover Islam  Centre,
Kingdom of Bahrain.

Executive  Director,  The

Member



Member




Member
l
Sheikh  Dr.  Mohammed Akram International  Shari'ah  Research
Laldin                                               Academy for Islamic  Finance,
Member
I

























37





Introduction



Shari'ah Standards Committee  (1)
Kuwait


NAME            POSITION                       STATUS


Sheikh  Dr. Esam 'Anezi
Chairman,  Shari'ah  Supervisory
Board,  Investment  Dar,  Kuwait

Chairman

Sheikh  Dr. Muhammad  Anas   Senior  Advisor,  Shura  Shari'ah
Al Zarka                                       Consultancy

Director,  Sharl'ah  Compliance

Member
Dr.  Mohammed  Awd Ali
Alfezee


Dr.  Ali Ebrahim  Al Rashid
-
Sheikh Abdul Sattar al
Qattan


Dr.  Abdul Aziz Al Qassar


Dr.  Hamed  Hassan Merah


Dr.  Abdul  Rahman  Abdulla
Al Saadi

Department,  Alimtiaz Investment,
-Kuwait
Shari'ah  Consultant,  Al Raya
Consulting  and Training,  Kuwait

General Manager,  Shura  Shari'ah
Conslutancy,  Kuwait

Professor, College of Shari'ah, University  of Kuwait,  Kuwait


Secretary  General, AAOIFI


Advisor,  AAOIFI

Member
Member Member Member Member Rapporteur


















38





Introd uction



Shari'ah Standards Committee  (2)
Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia


NAME            POSITION                 ]sr»rs

[  Shari'ah  Advisor, Islamic
Sheikh  Dr. Ayashi Faddad         Development  Bank, Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia

Chairman  and Member of IFIs' Sheikh  Dr.  Mohamed  Ali Al    Shari'ah  Supervisory  Boards,

Chairman



Member
Qari


Sheikh  Dr. Yousef Abdullah
AJ-Shubaily



Dr. Mosa Adam  Essa

-------~--

Dr.  Sami Al-Suwailem



Dr.  Abdulla al Omrani




Dr.  Adel Qouteh
Kingdom  of Saudi  Arabia

Member, Shari'ah Supervisory Board,  Bank Albilad, Kingdom of Saudi  Arabia

Head of Shari'ah  Compliance, National Commercial  Bank, Kingdom  of Saudi  Arabia

Head,  Financial  Product
Development  Centre

Faculty Member,  College of Shari'ah,  Al-Imam  Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic  University, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

King Abdul Aziz  University, Jeddah,  Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia




Member



Member



Member




Member




Member

Dr.  Hamed  Hassan Merah


Dr.  Abdul Rahman  Abdulla
Al Saadi
Secretary  General,  AAOIFI


Advisor,  AAOIFI
Member
--
Rapporteur









39





Introduction



Shari'ah Standards Committee  (3)
Dubai, United Arab Emirates


NAME                                 POSITION                  STATUS


President  and General Secretary
Sheikh  Dr. Abdul Sattar Abu       of the Unified Shari'ah  Board             Chairman
Ghuddah                                          of Al Baraka Banking  Group,
Kingdom  of Saudi  Arabia
Dr. Osaid Mohammed  Adeeb     Head ofShari'ah  at Abu Dhabi

Kilani                                              Islamic Bank
Member


Dr.  M. Imran  Usmani
Resident Shari'ah  Board Member, Meezan Bank, Pakistan

Secretary General,  International

Member
Dr.  Abdul  Sattar  Khuwaylidi       Islamic Center  for Reconciliation       Member and Arbitration,  United Arab
-E-mirates
Dr.  Amin Fatih                              -Advisory,  United  Arab Emirates         Member
Chairman  and Member  of[Fis'
Sheikh Nizam  Yaquby                  Shari'ah  Supervisory  Boards,               Member
Kingdom  of Bahrain

Sheikh Yusuf Tahal  De  Lorenzo   Chief Shari'ah  Officer, Shari'ah            Member
--          Capital,  United States
Dr.
Hamed  Hassan Merah            Secretary  General,  AAOIFI                  Member


Dr.  Abdul Rahman  Abdulla Al   Advisor,  AAOIFI                                 Rapporteur
Saadi










40





Introduction



Shari'ah Standards Committee  (4)
Karachi, Pakistan


NAME             POSITION                     STATUS

Vice-President,  Darul-Uloom
Sheikh Muhammad  Taqi      Karachi,  Pakistan,  and Permanent            Chairman
Usmani                                     Member,  OIC Fiqh  Academy,
Kingdom of Saudi  Arabia

Dr.  M. Imran  Usmani            Resident  Shari'ah  Board  Member,              Member
Meezan Bank,  Pakistan

Resident Shari'ah  Board  Member,
Mufti.  M. Hassan Kaleem      Dubai  Islamic  Bank Pakistan  Limited,      Member and Shari'ah  Advisor,  Deloitte
-
Chairman,  Shari'ah  Supervisory
Mufti.  Irshad  Ahmad  Aijaz
Board,  Bank Islami  Pakistan
Member

Dr.  Khalil  Ahmed  Azami      Shan'ah  Advisor,  Al Falah  Bank              Member
Limited,  Pakistan
-
Darul-Uloom  Karachi, Member of
Dr.  Mohammed  Zubair Al
Usmani

Shan'ah  Board,  Habib  Bank Limited,        Member
-Pakistan
Mufti.  Abdullah  Najeeb U   Resident  Shari'ah  Board Member,
Haq Siddi qui
Al Baraka Bank (Pakistan) Limited,          Member
Pakistan
-    -~                                             -

Dr.  Hamed  Hassan Merah    Secretary  General,  AAOIFI                        Member















41





Introd uction



Accounting  and Auditing  Standards Board


NAME                               POSITION                           STATUS


Mr.  Hamad  Abdulla
Senior  Vice President,  Head of          Chairman  of
Eqab                               Financial  Control,  Al Baraka               Accounting  and
Banking  Group,  Kingdom  of        Auditing Standards
Bahrain.                                                           Board            -
Chairman  of
Mr. Jalil Al-Aali                 Partner,  KPMG Fakhro,                           Accounting
Kingdom of Bahrain                                  Standards
Committee
-
Head,  Central  Accounting                     Chairman  of

Mr.  Jamil  Darras

Section,  Finance Department, Islamic Development  Bank, Kingdom of Saudi  Arabia.
Auditing and
Governance
Standards
Committee
-
President  and General Secretary Sheikh  Dr.  Abdul             of the Unified Shari'ah  Board Sattar Abu Ghuddah         of AI Baraka Banking  Group,
Kingdom of Saudi  Arabia

Shari'ah Advisor & Board


Member
Sheikh  Essam
Mohammedishaq
Member,  Discover Islam  Centre, Kingdom of Bahrain.

Accounting  Department,  Banque

Member
-
Mr.  Firas S  Hamdan
du Liban (Central  Bank of                        Member
- Lebanon),  Lebanon.                   --
Dr.  Hussein Said Saifan  Assistant General Manager,                       Member
Jordan  Islamic  Ban-k,  J-ordan     - -
Dr.  Nordin                         Deloitte Kassimchan,  Malaysia                  Member
Mohammed  Zain                                                                                             -
Partner,  EY, Kingdom of
Mr.  Fawad Laique
Bahrain.
Member







42





Introd uction



M r.  Oliver  Agba


Mr. Qudeer  Latif
Managing  Partner,  Agha & Co
United  Arab Emirates
i
Partner,  Clifford Chance  LLP, Dubai,  United  Arab Emirates.

Member


Member


Mr. Mohamed  Said El
Saka


Dr. Hamed  Hassan
Merah

General Manager,  Financial Control  and Planning Department,  Kuwait International Bank, Kuwait

Secretary-General,  AAOIFI
--+--




_,_



Member



Member  & Rapporteur









































43





Introd uction



Accounting  Standards Committee


NAME                                  POSITION                      STATUS


Mr. Jalil Al-Aali               Partner,  KPMG Fakhro,  Kingdom of
Bahrain

Accounting  Department,  Banque  du
lcaran

-------<,
Mr. Firas S  Hamdan



Mr.  Fawad Laique
Liban (Central  Bank of Lebanon),
Lebanon.

Partner,  EY  & Young, Kingdom  of
Member



Mr.  Imtiaz Ibrahim


Mr. Aly Fl  Azhary
Mr.Mahesh                J
Balasubramaniam
Bahrain.                                                              Member
Partner,  EY, Qatar                       ---1 Member
Deloitte  & Touch Bakr Albulkhair  & Co.,     M     b
Kingdom of Saudi  Arabia                                    em  er

Partner,  KPMG Fakhro,  Kingdom of          Member
Bahrain


Mr.  Madhukar  Shenoy       Partner,  PwC, Kingdom of Bahrain
Member


Mr.  Irshad  Mahmood
Director,  PwC, Kingdom of Bahrain
Member

Vice  Chairman  & Chief Executive
Mr.  Issam  Z Al-Tawari    I  Officer,  Rasameel Structured  Finance
Co.,  Kuwait.


Member

Dr.  Hamed  Hassan
Merah

Secretary-General,  AAOIFI
I         Member












44





Introd uction



Auditing  and Governance Standards Committee
NAME            POSITION                     I STATUS

]Head,  Central  Accounting Section,
Mr. Jamil Darras



Sheikh  Essam
Mohammed Ishaq
Finance  Department,  Islamic Development Bank, Kingdom  of Saudi Arabia.

Shari'ah  Advisor  & Board  Member, Discover  Islam  Centre,  Kingdom  of Bahrain.
Islamic  Bank,  Jordan                             rl

Chairman




Member



Member
Dr.  Hussein  Said Saifan   I Assistant  General  Manager,  Jordan      -



Mr.  Oliver Agha
r Managing  Partner,  Agha & Co,  United
Arab Emirates

Member

Mr Qudeer  Lat      leaner,  Citvord  Chance  LLP Data,, [
United  Arab Emirates.

Member


Dr. Hatim  El-Tahir             Director,  Deloitte,  Kingdom  of Bahrain        Member


Dr.  Hamed  Hassan
Merah                                   Secretary-General,  AAOIFI                             Member






















45


























Shari'ah  Standard No. (1)



'Trading in Currencies












Contents


Subject                                                                                        Page
Pref: ilce...................................................................................................       51
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................          52
].  Scope  of  the Standard ......coo«rooms+so«ors»»roses»so»no»room                             5l
2.  Shari'ah  Ruling on Trading  in Currencies......................................          52
3.  Date of Issuance  af the Standard............................................................          58
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................          59
Appendix  (a)   Brief History of  the Preparation of the Standard.............          60
Appendix (b):  Ihe Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard..........so.so.........          62

































49








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE  ALL-MERCIFUL,  THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all his companions





Preface


The purpose  of this standard  is to explain  the Shari'ah rulings relating to trading  in currencies,  as well as the conditions  and precepts  laid  down  by the Shari'ah  as to what is  permissible  in currency trading  and what is  not. The  standard also explains some  of the practices  being applied by Islamic financial Institutions.("






























(1) The  word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



51





Sh ari'ah Standard  No.  (1):  Trading  in  Currencies





Statement of the Standard


1.  Scope  of the Standard

This standard  covers  issues  of both  actual  and  constructive  possession of currencies,  the use of modern  means of communication  in currency trading,  exchange of currencies  in the context of the bilateral settlement of debts owed by the parties  to the exchange,  dealing in currencies  in money markets,  bilateral  promises   to  buy and sell  currencies,  deferment  of the delivery of one afi two countervalues in currency trading, and some cases practised by the Institutions.

The standard  does  not cover the following cases:  those where there are no trading  in currencies; the effect of goldsmithery in selling gold and silver;  transfirs  of debts that do not involve  exchanges of currency;  and the discounting  of bills of exchange.
2. Shari'ah  Ruling on Trading  in Currencies

2/1   It is permissible to trade  in currencies,  provided  that  it is done  in compliance  with  the following  Shari'ah  rules and precepts:

2/1/1  Both parties  must take possession of the countervalues  before dispersing,  such possession being either actual or constructive.

2/1/2 The  countervalues   of the  same  currency  must  be of equal amount,  even if one of them  is  in paper money and the other is  in  coin  of the same country,  like a note of one pound  for a coin  of one pound.
2/1/3  The contract shall  not contain any conditional option or def r•
ment clause regarding the delivery of one or both countervalues.

2/1/4 The dealing in currencies  shall  not aim at establishing  a mo• nopoly position,  nor should it entail any evil consequences  to the interest of individuals  or societies.



52





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (1):  Trading  in  Currencies

2/1/5  Currency transactions shall not be carried  out on the forward or futures market.

2/2  It is prohibited to enter  into  forward  currency contracts.  This  rule applies  whether  such contracts  are effected  through  the exchange of deferred transfers of debt or through the execution of a deferred contract in which  the  concurrent   possession  of both of the countervalues  by both parties does not take place.

2/3  It is also prohibited to deal  in the forward currency market even if the purpose  is hedging to avoid a loss of profit on a particular  transaction effected in a currency  whose value  is  expected to decline.
2/4  I is  permissible for the Institution to hedge  against  the future de•
valuation of the currency by recourse to the following:

2/4/1  To execute back to back interest free loans using different  cur• rencies without  receiving  or giving any extra benefit, provided these  two loans  are not contractually connected to each other.

2/4/2 Where  the  exposure  is in  respect  of an  account   payable,  to sell goods  on credit  or by Murabahah in the currency of the exposure.
2/5  It is  permissible  for the Institution and the customer to agree,  at the time of settlement of the instalments of a credit  transaction (such  as a Murabahah), that  the payment shall be made  in another currency applying  the spot exchange  rate on the day of payment.
2/6  Possession in sales ct currencies

2/6/1 When   a contract is  concluded for the  sale of an amount  of currency,  possession  must  be taken  for  the  whole  amount that is the subject  matter  of the contract at the closing  of the transaction.
2/6/2 Taking  possession   of one  of the  countervalues  by one  party without  taking  possession  of the other  is not  enough  to make a currency dealing  transaction  permissible.  Likewise,  taking partial possession   is  not  sufficient.  Taking possession  of part



53





Shari'ah Standard No.  (1):  Trading in  Currencies

of a countervalue   is valid only in respect  of the part,  posses• sion  of which  is  complete, whereas  the  remaining  part of the transaction  remains invalid.

2/6/3 Possession  may take  place either physically  or constructively.
The  form  of taking  possession  of assets differs  according  to
their nature  and customary  business practices.

2/6/4 Physical  possession   takes  place  by  means  of  simultaneous delivery by hand.

2/6/5 Constructive   possession  of an asset is  deemed  to have  taken place by the seller enabling  the other  party to take  its  delivery and dispose of it,  even if there is  no physical taking of posses• sion.  Among  other  forms  of constructive  possession  that  are
approved  by both  Shari'ah  and  business  customary  practices
are the following:

a) To credit a sum of money to the account of the customer in the following situations:
1.  When the Institution  deposits to the credit of a customer's account a sum of money directly or through a bank transfer.
2.  When the customer enters into a spot contract of currency exchange between himself and the Institution,  in the case of the  purchase  of a currency  against  another  currency already  deposited  in the account of the customer.
3.  When the Institution debits - by the order of the customer
- a sum of money to the  latter's  account and credits  it to another account in a different currency,  either in the same Institution  or  another  Institution,  for  the  benefit  of the customer or any other payee. In following such a procedure, the Institution  shall  adhere  to the principles of Islamic law regarding currency exchange.

A delay in  making  the transfer  is  allowed to the  Institution, consistent with  the practice whereby a payee may obtain actual receipt according  to prevailing business practices in currency



54





Shari'ah Standard No (1):  Trading in  Currencies

markets. However, the payee  is not  entitled to dispose  of the currency during  the transfer  period,  unless and until the effect of the bank transfer  has taken effect so that the  payee is able to make an actual delivery of the currency to a third party.
b) Receipt of a cheque constitutes constructive  possession, provid• ed the balance payable is available in the account of the issuer in the currency  of the cheque and the Institution  has blocked such a balance for payment.
c) The receipt  of a voucher  by a merchant,  signed  by the credit card holder  (buyer),  is constructive possession of the amount of currency entered as payable on the coupon provided that the card issuing Institution pays the amount  without  def erment to the merchant accepting  the card.

2/7 Agency in trading in currencies

2/7/]  It is  permissible to appoint an agent  to execute  a contract of sale of a currency with authorisation to take possession  of and deliver  the countervalue.
2/7/2 I is permissible to appoint  an agent to sell currencies without authorizing him to take possession  of the amount  sold, provided the principal or another agent takes possession  at the closing  of the transaction,  before the principal parties are dispersed.

2/7/3  It  is  permissible  to authorise  taking  possession  of the counter• values  after the execution  of a contract of currency exchange, provided such possession  is completed by the authorised agents at the closing of the transaction,  before the principal parties  are dispersed.
2/8  Use of modern means of communication for currency trading

2/8/1 Bilateral  contracting between two parties  at  different remote places   using  modern  communication  means   has the  same juristic consequences as execution of the contract in one and ame place.



55





Sh ari'ah Standard  No.  (1):  Trading  in  Currencies

2/8/2 An offer made for a stated period,  which is transmitted  by one of the prescribed means of communication,  remains  binding on the offeror during that period. The contract is not completed until  acceptance  by the offeree, and taking  possession  of the countervalues  (either  actual or constructive)  by both  parties,
has taken place.

2/9  Bilateral  promise  to purchase and sell currencies

2/9/1  A bilateral promise to purchase  and sell currencies  is  forbidden ifthe promise is binding, even for the purpose of hedging against currency devaluation risk. However,  a promise from one party is permissible even if the promise is  binding.

2/9/2 Parallel  purchase and sale of currencies  is not permissible,  as it
incorporates  one of the following invalidating factors:

a)'There is no delivery and receipt of the two currencies bought and sold,  and thus the contract amounts  to a deforred sale of currency.
b) Making  a contract  of currency  exchange  conditional   on another  contract  of currency  exchange.
c)A  bilateral  promise  that  is  binding  on both  parties to the contract  of currency  exchange,  and this is not permissible.
2/9/3  It is not permissible  for one of the partners in Musharakah  or Mudarabah  to be a guarantor  for the other partner,  to protect the latter  from the risks of dealing in  currencies.  However,  it is permissible  for a third party to volunteer being a guarantor for that purpose, provided  this guarantee  is not stated in the contract.

2/10Exchange of currencies that are debts owed by the parties

An exchange of amounts  denominated  in currencies that are debts established as an obligation on the debtor is permissible,  ifthis results in the settlement of the two debts in place  of a bilateral exchange of currencies,  and in the fulfilment of the obligations in respect of these debts.  This covers the following cases:



56





Shari'ah Standard No (1):  Trading in  Currencies

2/10/1  Discharge  of two  debts  when  one party  owes an  amount from another party denominated  in (say) dinar and the other party  owes an amount  from the first party  denominated  in (say)  dirham.  In  this  context,  both  may  agree on the  rate
ct exchange  between  the  dinar  and  the  dirham   in  order
to  extinguish  the  debts,  wholly  or  partially.   This  type  of
transaction  is  known  as al-Muqassah (set-off).

2/10/2  The  creditor's  making  payment  of a  debt  due  to  him  in a currency diffierent from that in which the debt was incurred, provided  the settlement  is  effected  as a spot transaction  at
the spot exchange rate on the day ct settlement.

2/11 Combination  of currency  exchange and transfer  of money

It is permissible to execute a financial transfer of money (remittances) in a currency different  from that presented by the applicant for the transfer.  This  transaction  consists  of a currency  exchange effected through  actual  or constructive possession  by delivering an amount of currency that is  evidenced by a bank draft, followed by the transfer of the amount  using currency that is  bought by the applicant for the transf r of money. It is  permissible for the Institution  to charge a fe for the transfer.

2/12Forms of dealing  in currencies  via Institutions

2/12/1  Among the forms that are not permitted  is  the customer  of an Institution  entering into currency trading  fer an amount of money exceeding the  amount  of money  he owns,  using credit facilities  granted by the Institution  which handles the currency  trading,  thus enabling the  customer  to enter  into a  transaction  for  an  amount  in  excess of what  he  would otherwise be able  to pay for.

2/12/2  It is  not permitted  for the Institution  to lend  the customer a sum  of money  on  the  condition   that  currency  dealing must  be  effected  with  that  Institution  and  not  with  any other. Ifthere is no such condition,  then there is  no Shari'ah
prohibition.



57





Sh ari'ah Standard  No.  (1):  Trading  in  Currencies

3. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 27 Safar  1421  A.H., corresponding to 31  May
2000A.D.




















































58





Shari'ah Standard No.  (1):  Trading in  Currencies





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Standard on Trading in Currencies was adopted  by the Sharf'ah  Board in  its  meeting  No.  (4)  held on 25-27 Safar  1420  A.H., corresponding  to 29-31  May 2000 A.D.













































59





Shari'ah Standard No.  (1):  Trading in  Currencies





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its  meeting  No.  (1)  held  in Bahrain on Saturday  11   Dhul-Qadah  1419
A.H.,  corresponding  to 27  February  1998 A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Board decided to
give priority to the preparation of a Shari'ah standard on Trading in Currencies.

On Saturday  11  Dhul-Qa'dah   1419  A.H.,  corresponding to 27 February
1999  A.D.,  a Shari'ah  consultant was commissioned  to  prepare  a juristic study and an exposure  draft.
In its meeting held in Bahrain on 13-16 Rabi' I,  1420 A.H., corresponding to 27-30  June  1999  A.D.,  the  Shari'ah  Committee  discussed   the  juristic study  and  made  certain  amendments to it.  The committee  also discussed the exposure draft  of the standard in its meeting  No. (3) held  in Bahrain on 9-1I Rajab  1420 A.H., corresponding to 18-20 October 1999 A.D., and asked the consultant to make some amendments in light of the comments made  by the members.
The revised exposure  draft of the standard  was presented to the Shari'ah Board in its meeting  No.  (2) held in Mecca on  10-15 Ramadan  1420 A.H., corresponding to  18-22  December  1999  A.D.  The  Sharf'ah  Board  made further   amendments to  the  exposure  draft  of the  standard   and  decided
that it should  be distributed to specialists  and interested parties  in order  to
obtain  their comments in order  to discuss them  in a public hearing.

A public hearing was held in Bahrain  on 29-30  Dhul-Hajjah  1421  A.H., corresponding to  4-5  April  2000 A.D.  The  Public  hearing  was attended by more  than  30 participants representing central banks,  Institutions,  ac• counting  firms,  Shari'ah  scholars,  academics  and others who are interested in this field.  Members  of the Shari'ah  Studies Committee responded in the



60





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (1):  Trading  in  Currencies

public  hearing  to  the written  comments  as well as to the  oral comments that were expressed in the public hearing.
The  Sharf'ah   Studies   Committee   held  its  meeting  No.   (5)   on  22-24
Muharram  1421  A.H.,  corresponding to 26-28 April 2000 A.D,  to discuss the  comments  made  about  the  exposure   draft.   The  Committee  made the  necessary  amendments,  which  it deemed  necessary  in light  of both the  discussions   that  took  place  in  the  public  hearing   and  the  written comments  that were received.

The  Shari'ah  Board  in its  meeting  No  (4)  on  25-27  Safar  1421  A.H., corresponding  to 29-31  May 2000 A.D., in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah discussed  the amendments made  by  the Shari'ah Studies Committee,  and
made the necessary amendments, which it deemed necessary. The standard was adopted  by the majority vote of the members  of the Shari'ah Board, as recorded in the minutes of the Shari'ah  Board.


































61





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (1):  Trading in  Currencies





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Available Evidence Pertaining  to the Exchange of Currencies

In the Hadiths of the Prophet,  there are many Hadiths which govern the rules regarding the exchange of currencies.  The best known Hadith is the one reported  on the authority of Ubadah Ibn Al-Samit (may Allah be pleased  with  him)  that the Prophet  (peace  be upon him)  said:  "Gold
for gold,  silver for silver - until  he said  - equal for equal,  like for like,  hand
to  hand,  if the kinds of assets  differ, you may sell them  as you wish provided it is  hand to  hand."G'The other Hadith, reported on the authority of Abu Sa'id  Al-Khudri,  is  that the Prophet  (peace  be upon him)  said:  "Do  not
sell gold fr gold except  equal fr equal and do not sell  what is deferred fr
a spot  exchange." These two Hadiths show clearly enough that gold is  of one kind and the silver   is  of another.  A few decisions have been issued by  Islamic  Fiqh organizations"  in accordance  with  the Shari'ah ruling that has been already accepted amongst the jurists,  namely that dinars are of a different kind from dirhams.  Contemporary  Islamic  Fiqh  scholars have made  an analogy between  paper  and  coin  money  and gold  and silver money ref zrred  to in the prophetic  Hadith.  The currency  of each

(2) Related  by Muslim  in his "Sahih Muslim".
(3)  Related   by AI-Bukhari  in his "Sahih Al-Bukhari".
(4) Among other examples is the one issued by the General council of Fatwa in Kuwait as
follows: It is  permissible to sell currencies  that are different from each other because every currency is considered as a kind of money on its own, like that of gold and silver, and therefore  it ls permissible  to sell a particular  currency  such as dollar, for another currency such as Indian  Rupee even for Inequality as it is permissible to sell gold for silver for a different weight, provided the bilateral taking possession of the two counter values (  two currencies)  must  take place in the session  of the contract.  However, if a certain amount of a particular currency is sold for the same currency such as Indian rupee for  Indian  rupee,  then the inequality is impermissible  (Majmuat Al-Fatawa AI- Shar'iyyah", Adminsitration of Fatwa of Kuwait 3/160 no. 788).



62





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (1):  Trading  in  Currencies

country  is considered as being of a kind that is different  from  that of other countries  as they are 'constructive money'  according  to the decision  of the International Islamic  Fiqh  Academy."   Therefore,  these  currencies  differ in kind according to the authority that  considers  them  as money.
On this basis,  it has been a condition,  in the exchange of currencies  that are of the same kind, that equality in amount  as well as taking possession  of the two countervalues before the two contracting parties depart  the place of the closing of the contract.  However, if the kind of the currencies  to be exchanged  is different, then it is permissible  for the amounts  to be different, but the condition of taking  possession  of the countervalues before the two contracting parties  leave the place of signature of the contract shall prevail.

Shari'ah  Ruling  on Trading in Currencies

The original  ruling  on trading  in currencies  is  that  it is  permissible,  as it falls under  the general Islamic provisions  regarding  the permissibility of selling gold,  silver and money because this is one means of earning  a profit. This  ruling  is  applicable  as long as there  is  no reason  for considering  the dealing as prohibited or objectionable. The basis of this ruling is the Hadith that  are  available  with  regard  to  exchange  of currencies  and  the  general ruling  that  is  derived  from  these  Hadith  as decided  by the jurists  in the chapter  on currency  exchange.  Whenever   one  of the  Sharf'ah  precepts  is not met,  then the dealing  is not permissible.

Stipulation  of Equality and Taking  Possession

While equality of the countervalues and concurrent taking of possession are  required   in  the  exchange  of two  similar   kinds  of currencies,  only bilateral taking  of possession  is required  in the exchange of two dissimilar kinds,  based on the basis stated in ( 1)  above.

Constructive Possession

Constructive  possession  -as  in  the  forms  mentioned in the standard• is  on an equal footing  with actual  possession,  because  the Shari'ah  never prescribed a particular method  for taking  possession. Therefore, reference must be made  to the prevailing  custom  in the business  community which

(5) The  International  Islamic  Fiqh  Academy Resolution  No.  21  (9/3).



63





Shari'ah Standard No.  (1):  Trading in  Currencies

results in the ability to dispose  of the currency  for the intended  purpose and transfer  of the risk of the currency  to the transferee,  as in the forms mentioned  in the standard.

As for  the various  forms  of constructive  possession,  there  is  a decision issued by the International Islamic Fiqh Academy,"  and the various Fatwa Committees  have added to these forms some others,  such as the credit card settlement coupon.

The Ninth Seminar  of Al Baraka"has confirmed the prohibition of giving a guarantee by one of the parties in Mudarabah a- Musharakah transactions to the other party,  to indemnify  him against currency risks.

Agency in Exchange of Currencies and  Issue of Taking  Possession

Agency  in  exchange  of  currencies is  permissible  because  agency  is permissible  with  regard  to an activity that  the principal  could  undertake personally.  As one could undertake  the exchange himself,  then  it is  also permissible  for him  to authorise  its  undertaking   by  others  on his  behalf. However,   since   taking   possession   of  the   countervalues    immediately after  concluding  the  contract  has  been  a juristic  condition,  the juristic requirement  in the case of agency would be the taking  possession  by the parties  to the contract  of exchange,  whether  through  principal  or agent. When  the agency is  for  the purpose  of taking possession only,  the juristic rule relates  to the leaving  of the place of execution of the contract  by both
principals before possession  is  taken,  and not to the agent's doing so.

Use of Modern Means of Communication for Trading  in Currencies

The International  Islamic  Fiqh Academy"issued a decision on the sub• ject of those means of communication.  This is  a reinforcement  of what has already been  approved  by the jurists  on  the  permissibility  of concluding

(6)  International  Islamic Fiah Academy  Resolution  No.  53  (3/6);  "Majallat Al-Majma",
vol 6 [2:  785]
(7)  Fatwa  No.  (12/6)  of AI Baraka  Seminar No.  (12), stating: A payment  slip signed by the
cardholder is tantamount  to receipt,  by means  of a cheque. In this respect  it is stronger than a cheque, as stated by experts, because it is binding on the trader  and it discharges the cardholder of the debt immediately,  and he may  not protest the collection of  the amount thereof.
(8) AI Baraka  Seminar No. 9 (9/5).
(9) The  International Islamic Fiqh Academy Resolution No.  52 (3/6)



64





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (1):  Trading in  Currencies

a contract via writing  and communications  that can be understood.  'This would cover all contemporary means such as telex,  fax  internet,  etc.

Bilateral  Promise in Exchange of Currencies
The prohibition of.a binding  bilateral promise  in an exchange of currencies is  supported  by  the majority  of Shari'ah jurists, because  binding bilateral promises  from two parties are equivalent to a contract,  and also for the reason that the bilateral  promise   is  not immediately   followed  by taking possession of. the countervalues,  since  it is  not the wish of. the parties to take possession at  that time.

Financial Institutions have a customary practice of treating promises as binding,  even when formally they are not. A promise from one party only (as  opposed to a bilateral  promise)  is  permissible  in currency exchange, even if it is binding.

Exchange of. Currencies  that Are Owed by the Parties
The basis of. the permissibility of an exchange of amounts denominated in currencies that are debts  established  as an obligation  of. the debtor,  on the condition  that the two obligations  are thereby settled,  is  that this  would entail  the settlement of the debt by discharging it.  'This  does  not involve any prohibited transaction pertaining to debts either with regard to sale or purchase.
As  for some of the  forms mentioned in the  standard, there are texts  to support  them,  inter alia,  the Hadith reported on the  authority of Ibn  Umar (may Allah  be pleased with him) who said: "T  have met the Prophet (peace be upon him) at the house ofHafsah  (may Allah  be pleased with her). And I  said to him: 'O Prophet of Allah, I would  like to ask you; I sell a camel in Al-Baqi' for a price  quoted in dinar but I take dirham, and I sell for a price  quoted in dirham but I take  dinars, I take  this from this and I give  this from this'. The Prophet (peace  be upon him)  replied:   'There is no objection to your taking the
other  currency  based  on  the price  of the  day,  provided you  do not leave  each
other with something remaining  owed  as a debt between yo',"9 Some of the
forms in the standard  are a kind of. set-off and this is permissible.

(IO)  Related by Abu Dawud, AI-Tirmidhi,  AI-Nassa'i,  bn  Majah  and A!-Hakim,  who deemed it a sound Hadith, as confirmed  by Al-Dhahabi.  It was also narrated  without a chain  of narrators, quoting only Ibn Umar  (AL-Talkhis A! Habir" [3:  26)).



65





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (1):  Trading  in  Currencies

Combination of Currency Exchange  and  Transfer of Money

The basis of the permissibility of the combination  of currency  exchange and transfer  of money  is  the  achievement  of constructive  possession  by virtue of a bank draft for the amount that is given in one currency  in return for an amount paid in another currency for the purpose of its  transfer. In this regard,  there is  a decision by the International  Islamic Academy of Fiqh that reads:  "If a transfer of money is  to be made in a currency different  from the currency  of the amount paid by the applicant,  then the transaction  is  based on currency  exchange and transfer of money. The currency  exchange takes place before  the transf er,  that is,  the customer pays the amount of money to the bank and the bank, after agreeing on the currency exchange rate that is printed  on the receipt  delivered to the customer,  issues  a bank draft on the basis of transfer of debt in the sense that has been mentioned?a

Forms  of Trading  in Currencies

The following form is not permissible: providing a type of financial facility to a customer  who wishes  to engage in currency trading which enables him to deal  in amounts  that he does  not own and to sell amounts  that he does not own.  An alternative  and permissible  form  is  that the Institution  lends the money to the customer so that the latter would then deal in amounts that he owns.  However,  this would  not be permissible  if the Institution  made it a condition of the loan  that the customer must carry out the currency trading with  the  Institution,  as this would  involve  a combination  of both loan  and
contract  of exchange.  This is  not permissible because it results  in a benefit
to the lender.  Where no such condition  is  imposed,  there is  no prohibition.
















(1l)  International  Islamic  Figh Academy  Resolution  No.  48  (1/9)



66






















Shari'ah  