Standard No.  (2)



Debit Card, Charge Card and Credit Card












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page
Pref: ace...................................................................................................      71
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................          72
I.  Scope  of the Standard ............so.so.sos.so.sos.so.so.sos.so.so....        7}
2.  Characteristics of Different Types of Card............................................          72
2/1  Characteristics of the debit  card......................................................      72
2/2 Characteristics of the charge card....................................................          73
2/3 Characteristics of the credit card.....................................................          74
3. Shari'ah   Rulings for  Different Types of Card.....................................         74
4.   General Provisions...................................................................................          75
5.  Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................          76
Adoption  of the Standard......................................................................          77
Appendices
Appendix (a)   Brief History af the Preparation of the Standard..............          78
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard....................................          80








IN  THE NAME OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the  worlds,  and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and  all his companions





Preface


The purpose  of the standard  on debit card, charge card and credit card is to explain  their  types and  characteristics,  and  to lay down  the  Sharf'ah principles  for deaJing with the three types cf card by both Islamic financial Institutions  and their customers  who hold their cards and use them. The standard  also explains the Shari'ah rulings on the use of the cards in various circumstances.




























(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic  financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



71





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (2):  Debit Card, Charge Card and Credit Card





Statement of the Standard


1.  Scope of the Standard

The standard  covers debit cards, charge cards and  credit  cards  that  are issued by Institutions  to their customers  to enable the latter, by using the cards,  either to withdraw  cash from their accounts  or to obtain  credit or to pay for goods or services purchased. These cards include the following types:
• Debit card
• Charge card
• Credit card

2. Characteristics of Different  Types of Card

While some  of the characteristics  are common  to more than  one type of
card,  some are specific to a particular  type of card.

2/1   Characteristics of the debit  card

2/1/1  The  Institution issues  the card to a customer   with  available funds  in his account.

2/1/2  The card confers  on its holder the right to withdraw  cash from his account  or to pay for  goods  or services  purchased  up to the limit of the available funds ( credit balance)  on his account. The debit to the customer's  account will be immediate, and the card does not provide him with any credit.

2/1/3  The customer  will not normally  pay any charges for using this card, except when it is used to withdraw  cash or to purchase another  currency  through  another  Institution different  from the Institution that has issued  the card.

2/1/4  The issuing  Institution may charge a fee  for issuing  the card, or may make no charge for issuing it.





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (2):  Debit  Card, Charg e Card  and Credit Card

2/1/5 Some  Institutions  charge  the  party   accepting  payment   by means  of the card a commission calculated  as a percentage of such payments.

2/2  Characteristics  of the charge  card

2/2/1  The  card  provides  a credit  facility  up to  certain   ceiling  for a specified  period   of time,  as well as providing a means  of repayment.

2/2/2 The card is  used to pay for goods  and  services  and to obtain cash.
2/2/3 This  card  does  not  provide  revolving  credit  facilities  to the cardholder,  insofar  as  the  cardholder  is   obliged   to  make payment for  the  purchased goods  or services  by the  end  of a prescribed  credit  period   following  receipt  cf a statement sent by the Institution issuing the card.

2/2/4 If the cardholder  delays payment  of the  amount  due beyond the period  of free credit,  an interest  charge  is  imposed  on the cardholder but none is imposed  by the Institutions.

2/2/5 The  Institution  issuing  the  card  does  not  charge  the  card• holder any percentage commission  on purchases,  but receives a percentage commission  from  the  party accepting  the  card
on purchases  made  by using the card.

2/2/6 The  Institution   issuing  the  card  is  obliged  to  pay  the  party accepting   the  card  for  purchases   made  by the  cardholder, within   a   specified   transaction  credit   limit   (or  the  agreed increase  thereon).  This  obligation  on  the  card  issuer  to  pay for  the cardholder's  purchases  is  direct,  and is  independent of the relationship between  the party accepting the card and the cardholder.

2/2/7  The Institution  issuing the card has a personal  and direct right against the cardholder  to be reimbursed  for any payments  made on his behalf. The issuer's  right  is  absolute and independent of



73





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (2):  Debit Card, Charge Card and Credit Card

the relationship  between the cardholder  and the party accepting the card in accordance  with the contract  between them.

2/3  Characteristics  of  the credit card

2/3/1   This card provides a revolving credit facility within the credit limit and credit period determined  by the issuer of  the card. It is also a means of  payment.

2/3/2 The holder  of  a credit card is able to pay for purchases of goods and services and to withdraw  cash, within  the approved  credit limit.

2/3/3 When  purchasing goods  or services,  the  cardholder  is  given a free credit  period  during  which  the amount  due  should  be paid  and no interest  is  chargeable.  The cardholder is  also al• lowed to defier paying the amount  due and is  charged  interest for the duration  ofi the credit.  In the case of  a cash withdrawal, there  is  no free credit  period.

2/3/4 The conditions set out in items 2/2 (e),  (f) and (g)  above are equally applicable  to this  type of card.
3. Shari'ah  Rulings for Different Types of Card

3/1   Debit  card

It is  permissible  for Institutions  to issue  debit  cards, as long as the cardholder  does not exceed the balance available on  his account  and no interest charge arises out of  the transaction.

3/2  Charge card

It is permissible  for Institutions to issue charge cards on the following conditions:

3/2/1  The cardholder  is not obliged to pay interest in the case cl delay in paying the amount  due.
3/2/2 If the  Institution  obliges the  cardholder  to deposit  a sum cl money  as a guarantee  and this amount  is  not available for the use of the card holder,  then  it must be made clear that the In-



74





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (2):  Debit  Card, Charg e Card  and Credit Card

stitution  will invest the money  for the benefit  of the cardhold• er on the basis of Mudarabah and that  any profit  accruing  on this  amount   will be shared  between  the  cardholder  and  the Institution according  to a specified  percentage.

3/2/3 The  Institution  must  stipulate  that  the  cardholder  may  not use the card  for  purposes prohibited by the Shari'ah  and that the Institution has the right to withdraw  the card in case such a condition is violated.

3/3  Credit card

It is  not permissible for an Institution  to issue credit cards that provide an interest-bearing   revolving  credit  facility,, whereby  the cardholder pays interest for being allowed to pay off the debt in instalments.

4. General Provisions

4/1  The affiliation of the  Institution to membership of international
card regulatory organizations

4/1/1  I is permissible  for Institutions  to join the membership of inter• national card regulatory organizations,  provided the Institutions avoid  any infringements   of Sharf'ah  that  may be prescribed  by those organizations.

4/1/2 I is  permissible  for the Institutions  to pay membership  fees, service charges and other  fees to international card regulatory organizations, so long as these do not include interest payments, even in an indirect way, such as  in the case of increasing  the service charge to cater for the granted  credit.

4/2  Commission to the card  issuer  payable by merchants  accepting
the card

It  is  permissible for the Institution  issuing  the card to charge a com• mission to the party accepting the card, at a percentage ofthe purchase price of the items  and services purchased  using the card.

4/3  Fees charged by the Institution to the card.holder

It is  permissible   for  the Institution  issuing  the card  to  charge  the
cardholder membership fees, renewal fees and replacement f2es



75





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (2):  Debit Card, Charge Card and Credit Card

4/4 Purchasing gold,  silver and currency with cards

It is  permissible  to purchase  gold, silver or currency  with a debit  card or a charge  card, in cases where the issuing Institution is  able  to settle the amount  due to the party accepting  the card without  any delay.

4/5 Cash  withdrawal  using a card

4/5/1  It is permissible  for the card.holder  to withdraw  an amount  of cash within the limit of his available funds,  or more  with  the agreement  of the  Institution  issuing  the  card,  provided   no interest  is  charged.

4/5/2 I is  permissible  for the Institution issuing the card to charge a flat  service  foe  for  cash  withdrawal,  proportionate  to the service  offered,  but  not  a fee  that  varies  with  the  amount withdrawn.

4/6 Privileges granted by card  issuing parties

4/6/1  I is   not  permissible  for  Institutions  to grant  the  cardholder privileges prohibited  by the Shari'ah,  such as conventional life insurance,  entrance  to prohibited places or prohibited  gifts.

4/6/2  It is permissible to grant privileges to the cardholder that are not prohibited  by the Shari'ah,  such  as a priority right  to services or discounts   on  hotel,  airline  or  restaurant reservations  and the like.
5. Date of Issuance of the Standard

The Standard was issued on 27 Safar 1421  A.H., corresponding to 31  May
2000A.D.














76





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (2):  Debit  Card, Charge Card  and Credit Card





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah  Standard on Debit Card,  Charge Card and Credit  Card was adopted  by the Shari'ah  Board  in its meeting No.  (4)  held  on 25-27 Safar
1421  A.H.,  corresponding to 29-31  May 2000 A.D.













































77





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (2):  Debit Card, Charge Card and Credit Card





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (1) held in Bahrain on Saturday 11 Dhul-Qa'dah 1419
A.H., corresponding to 27 February 1998 A.D,, the Shari'ah Board decided to give  priority  to  the preparation  cf a Shari'ah  standard  on debit card, charge card and credit card.

On Saturday  11 Dhul-Qadah  1419 A.H., corresponding  to 27  February
1999 A.D., a Shari'ah consultant  was commissioned to prepare  a juristic study and an exposure draft.
In its meeting held in Bahrain on 13-16 Rabi' I,  1420 A.H, corresponding to 27-30 June  1999  A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Studies  Committee  discussed the juristic study and inserted certain amendments  to it.  The committee also discussed the exposure draft of the standard in its meeting No.  (3)  held in Bahrain  on 9-11  Rajah 1420  A.H., corresponding  to 18-20  October  1999
A.D. and, asked the consultant to make the necessary amendments  in light
of the comments made by the members.

The revised exposure draft of the standard was presented to the Shari'ah Board in its  meeting No.  (2) held in Mecca on 10-15  Ramadan 1420 A.H., corresponding  to  18-22  December  1999  A.D.  The Shari'ah  Board  made further amendments to the exposure draft of the standard and decided that it should be distributed to specialists and interested parties to obtain their comments in order to discuss them in a public hearing.

A public hearing was held in Bahrain on 29--30 Dhul-Hajjah 1421  A.H., corresponding  to 4-5  April 2000 A.D.  The public hearing was  attended by more than 30 participants representing central banks, Institutions, accounting firms, Shari'ah scholars, academics and others who are interested in this field. Members of the Shari'ah Studies Committee responded in the



78





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (2):  Debit  Card, Charg e Card  and Credit Card

public hearing  to the written  comments  as well  as to the  oral comments that were expressed in the public hearing.
The  Sharf'ah  Studies  Committee   held  its   meeting  No   (5)  on  22-24
Muharram   1421  A.H.,  corresponding to 26-28 April 2000 A.D,,  to discuss the comments made  about  the exposure  draft. The committee  made  the necessary  amendments, which  it  deemed  necessary  in light of both  the discussions that took place in the public hearing, and the written comments that were received.

The Shari'ah Board in its meeting Na (4) held on 25-27 Safar  1421  A.H., corresponding to 29-31  May 2000 A.D.,  in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah
discussed   the  amendments  made  by  the  Shari'ah  Studies  Committee,
and  made the necessary  amendments, which  it deemed  necessary.  Some paragraphs  cf the standard   were adopted  by the  unanimous vote  cf the members of the Shari'ah Board,  while the other  paragraphs  were adopted by the  majority  vote of the members,  as recorded  in the  minutes  of the Shari'ah  Board.































79





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (2):  Debit  Card, Charg e Card  and Credit Card





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


1. Debit Cards

It is  permissible to issue debit cards subject to the conditions mentioned  in the standard, because such issuance  does not incur any Shari'ah prohibition.
2. Charge card

It is permissible to issue charge cards subject to the conditions  mentioned in the standard, because such issuance does not incur Shari'ah prohibition and  because the contract  involved does not grant credit facilities to the cardholder  in  exchange  for  interest.  Prohibition   might  be caused  by conditions incorporated  in the contract, or by dealings of the cardholder, which contravene  the Shari'ah.

3.  Credit  card

It is  prohibited to issue credit cards, as mentioned  in the standard, where such issuance  is  based on  a contract  granting the cardholder  the right to a revolving credit on terms that involve  interest, because Riha is  prohibited in  terms of either taking or giving. The prohibition of Riha is  established through Quranic Texts, direct and certain Hadiths of the Prophet (peace be upon him)  and the consensus of Muslim scholars,  rendering its prohibition well known  in  the  Muslim  community   as  self-evident.   However,  the issuance of  credit cards free from Riba,  or from any other legal  prohibition, is  permissible.

4.  Institution's  affiliation  to  membership   of international   card  regulatory organizations   is   permissible  because  the contracts   of  the  Institutions with those  organizations  are free from Shari'ah  infringements.  The fees that  the companies  pay  are  the charges  for  the  services  rendered  by the  international  organizations,  by  granting  a license,  carrying  out set•



80





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (2):  Debit Card, Charge Card and Credit Card

off in transactions  and  other  services.  The  transactions do not  relate  to the  advance  of loans  interest,  since the  dealings  of the  Institutions  are confined  to debit and charge cards that are free from any requirement to pay interest. These dealings do not involve credit cards of the type that are not permissible for the reason given above.

5.   It is  permissible  for Institutions to  charge  the  party  accepting  a card commission based on the prices  of purchases  or services  made  with the card, as this can be considered as partly a brokerage  and marketing fee as well as a service charge for the collection of the debt.

6.  It is  permissible  for  Institutions to charge  the  cardholder  membership or renewal  or replacement  fies, because  these  fees are in exchange  for the right given to the customer  to carry the card and to benefit  from  its services.

7. Purchasing  with  a  debit  card  constitutes  constructive  possession   as endorsed by the  Shari'ah.  When  the  purchaser  receives  gold  or  silver or currencies which  he is  buying,  uses the  card and signs the payment coupon  for the account  of the party accepting  the card, then constructive possession  takes place. This ruling  is  extracted from  the decision  of the International Islamic  Fiqh Academy' which  states  that  an accounting entry  is   considered  to  be   constructive  possession.   Thus,   the   legal condition  of taking  possession  is  satisfied when  using  cards to purchase gold or silver or currencies.

8. It is  permissible for the cardholder to withdraw cash from  his available funds  at the bank  using  the card,  because  this  is  to withdraw his own money.  Likewise,  it  is  permissible  for him  to withdraw  more  than his available  funds   from  the  Institution,   if the  latter  has  agreed  that  he
may do  so and  has  not  stipulated that  interest  is  payable  on the  such amounts.  This is  a permissible loan.
9.  In the case of the Institution stipulating that the card.holder must deposit a sum of money  prior  to receiving approval  to use the card, then  it is  not

(2)  International Islamic Fioh Academy Resolution Na. 53 (4/6).



81





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (2):  Debit  Card, Charg e Card  and Credit Card

permitted for the Institution to prevent the cardholder from investing the amount deposited in his account,  as this would be tantamount  to a loan that draws extra benefit. For that reason,  the appropriate  alternative is for amounts so deposited to be invested for the benefit of the cardholder on the basis of profit and loss sharing.

















































82
























