Shari'ah Standard No. (16)



Commercial Papers


(Revised Standard)












Contents



Subject                                                                                                                          Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................         444

I.  Scope  of the Standard  ..........sass·sos.sos.so.sos.sos.sos·so.sos.sos.so.                            444
2.  Definition and Shari'ah  Characterisation  of Commercial Papers.       444
3.  Rules for Dealing in Commercial  Papers........................................       445
4.  Endorsement...........................................................................................       445
5.  Collection of the Amount of Commercial Papers.........................        446
6.  Discounting of Commercial  Papers..                                                         446
7.  Taking Possession of Commercial Papers.............sos.sos.a..........        446
8.  Acceptance for Payment of the Value of Commercial Papers...........        447
9.  Dated Issuance of the Standard............................................................        448
Adoption  cl the Standard......................................................................        449
Appendices
Appendix (a):   Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard..............        450
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard.....................................        452
Appendix (c):   Definitions..............................................................................        459




















441








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE  ALL-MERCIFUL,  THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and  all his companions





Preface


The  purpose   of this  standard  is  to elaborate   the  rules  pertaining to commercial paper, the types permitted  and those not permitted, the rules for dealing in commercial  paper, its collection, discounting, possession  and the acceptance of the obligation to pay, as well  as the elaboration  of the Shari'ah regulations for Islamic financial Institutions  (Institution/Institutions)" for dealing in commercial  paper.




























(1) The word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



443





Shari'ah  Standard  Na (16):  Commercial  Papers





Statement of the Standard


1.  Scope of the Standard

This standard  covers commercial  papers to which the Geneva  Uniform Convention  on the Law of Commercial  Papers,"   confined  itself.  These are bill of  exchange, promissory note and cheque.  This standard  covers dealings in such commercial  papers insofar as they conform  to the rules and  principles  of the  Shari'ah.  The  standard  does  not  cover anything that may possess the attributes  of commercial  paper other than the three types named  above.

2. Definition  and Shari'ah  Characterisation of Commercial Papers

2/1   Bill  of exchange:  A written,  signed,  and  unconditional order  from a person  to another  person  to pay a certain  sum  of money  at  sight or at a particular or determinable date to a third  person  or to the order  of that third  person  or to the bearer  of that order.
2/2  Promissory  note:  A  certificate  whereby  by  the  issuer  (a  debtor) promises to pay a certain  amount  of money at sight or at a particular or determinable date to another  person  (a beneficiary/creditor). In Shari'ah  characterisation,  it is  considered  a certificate  of debt.

2/3  Cheque:  A certificate  that is  issued  to a particular  person,  contain• ing  an  order  issued  by  a person  (the  drawer)  to  another   person (the drawee) to pay a  certain  sum  of money  to a third  person  (the beneficiary)  at sight.  In  Shari'ah  characterisation,  it  is  considered a restricted  Hawalah  if the  drawer  is  a debtor  to the  drawee.  Oth• erwise,  it is  considered  an unrestricted  Hawalah with respect to the
drawer.

(2)  Issued on  1349/1350  A.H.,  corresponding to  1930/1931   A.D.,  and adopted  by a large
number of countries.



444





Shari'ah Standard  Na (16):  Commercial  Papers

3. Rules for  Dealing  in Commercial  Papers

3/1   It is  permissible to undertake transactions in commercial paper  of the  three  types  (bill  of exchange,  promissory note  and  cheque)  on the  condition that  it  does  not  amount  to the  contravention of the Shari'ah,  like Riha or delay that  is legally  prohibited  in accordance with the details provided  in the following paragraphs.

3/2  It is   not  permissible   to use  a bill of exchange  or  promissory  note in transactions that  require  possession  (of the counter-values), like deeming  the two types of commercial  paper as counter-values in the contract  of Sarf (currency exchange)  or as the counter-value for the capital  (Ras  al-Mal) in the contract of Salam.

3/3  It is  permitted to use a cheque  in the following types of transactions and situations:
a)  A cheque,  where  the  owner  has  a balance,  when  drawn  by  the client  against  the  bank  or by the  bank  against  another   bank or against itself or against one of its  branches.
b) A cheque,  where  the owner  has no balance,  when  drawn  by the client  against  a bank  or  is  drawn  by the  bank against  another bank or against  itself or against one of its branches  (the so-called overdraft). From Shari'ah perspective, it is a loan (Qard)  which is permissible  if it is void of Riba.

c)   A crossed cheque that binds the payee bank to fulfil its conditions.

d)  An account payee cheque that binds payee bank to fulfil its conditions
by crediting the amount  of the cbeque to the beneficiary's account. e)   Travellers  cbeques.  It is  permissible  for  the institution  issuing  it
to take commission in lieu of intermediation  in  such  issuance  or
at the time of its payment  provided  this does not include  Riba.

4. Endorsement

All forms of endorsements are binding  with  respect  to their  legal effects provided  that the endorsements fulfil the legal conditions and regulations determined for them.



445





Sh ari'ah  Standard  No  (16):  Commercial  Papers

5. Collection  of the Amount  of Commercial  Papers

The collection of the amount of commercial papers is considered  an agency with the client  appointing  the institution  as an agent to collect the value of the paper on his  behalf.  The institution  is entitled   to commission  that is  agreed upon  between the client and the institution.  In the absence of an agreement between them,  the practice prevalent among institutions  is to be acted upon.

6. Discounting of Commercial  Papers

6/1   It is not permissible  to discount  commercial  papers,  but it is permitted to pay an amount  that is  Jess than  the value of the paper to the first beneficiary prior  to the date of maturity.
6/2  It is  not permissib]e to sell commercial  paper that has not become due for an amount similar to its value (RRiba al-Nsi 'ah) nor for an amount that is  more than its value (Riba al-Nasi 'ah plus Riba al-Fad7).

6/3  It is  permissible  to the beneficiary  to treat commercial  paper that is not yet due as price for ascertained  goods or usufruct,  but not those that are sold by description  as a liability  with the condition  of actual or legal  delivery of goods or usufructuary  asset (commodity-based discounting  of debts).
6/4 The holder  of commercial  paper  is  permitted  to purchase  goods to be delivered later  (on  the date ri maturity  of  the paper),  and after the debt is  established as a liability. The holder of the paper transf 2rs the claim of his  creditor  to his debtor  through  this paper.  In  such a case,  the transaction  amounts  to Hawalah.

7.  Taking  Possession  of Commercial Papers

7/1  The receipt of  a cheque requiring  prompt  payment, if it is  a banker's cheque or a certified cheque or one that is legally deemed a certified cheques whereby a certain amount  is mandatorily  maintained  in the drawer's  account,  being  drawn  among  banks  or among  banks  and their  branches,  constitutes  constructive  possession  of the  amount written  on it,  and  it is on this  basis  that it is  permissible  to use the



446





Sh ari'ah  Standar d No  (16):  Comm ercial  Pa pe rs

cheque in transactions that stipulate possession  such as the exchange of currencies,  the purchase  of gold  or silver with the cheque  as well as treating the cheque as capital (Ras al-Mal) of Salam.
7/2  The receipt of a cheque that is to be paid promptly, ifit is not a banker's cheque or a certified cheque or one that is  legally deemed  a certified cheque,  cannot  be considered  constructive possession  of its amount, and  in such a case,  it  is  not  permitted  to use it for transactions for which possession  is  stipulated.

7/3  It  is   permitted   to  use  cheques  of bank  transfers   for  transactions when the amount  intended  to be transferred is in the same currency in which  payment  is  to  be  made,  however,  where  the  currency is different  from  that  in which  payment  is  to be made,  it is necessary to first apply the process  of conversion  between  the two currencies, deeming constructive  possession  to be sufficient, and then undertake the transf r.  It is  a form  combining   currency  exchange  (Sarf) and Hawalah.

8. Acceptance for  Payment of the Value of Commercial Papers

8/1   Acceptance  for paying the value of commercial  paper  on the part of the  drawee  is  considered   an undertaking and  an obligation  to pay the debt represented  by the commercial  paper  to the holder  on the date of maturity.  This undertaking and obligation must  be fulfilled according to the Shari'ah.

8/2  All parties whose signatures appear on the commercial paper including the drawer,  the endorser  and the guarantor  are jointly responsible  to pay to the holder  the value of the paper  in accordance  with  rules of liability,  thus,  the holder is entitled to have recourse to them severally or  jointly  after  the refusal  of the drawer  (or  the  issuer   in  case of a promissory  note) to pay.

8/3  Tangible  security. stipulated  by the holder  of commercial   paper  to ensure  the securing  of his right  will be deemed  a Mortgage  (Rahn) and will be governed  by the rules of Mortgage  (Rahn).



447





Shari'ah Standard No (16):  Commercial Papers

9. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Sharf'ah  Standard  was issued  on 7 Rabi'  I,  1424  A.H., corresponding to 8 May 2003 A.D.




















































448





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (16):  Comm ercial  Papers





Adoption of the Standard


The  Shari'ah  Standard  on  Commercial  Papers  was  adopted   by  the Sharf'ah  Board  in its meeting  No (10)  held during the period  of 2-7 Rabi I,  1424  A.H.,  corresponding to 3-8 May 2003 A.D.












































449





Shari'ah Standar d No  (16):  Comm ercial  Papers





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its  meeting No.  (7) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah  during the period of 9-13 Ramadan  1422  A.H.,  corresponding to 24-28 November 2001  A.D., the Shari'ah Board decided to issue the Shari'ah standard  for Commercial Papers  and  to  appoint  a Shari'ah  consultant   for  the  preparation   of the exposure  draft of the Shari'ah  standard  for commercial  papers.

On Saturday 14 Shawwal  1422 A.H., corresponding to 29 December 2001
A.D.,  a Shari'ah  consultant  was commissioned   to prepare  a juristic  study and an exposure draft on the Shari'ah standards  for  commercial  papers.
In its  meeting  held in the Kingdom  cf Bahrain  on 4-5 Safar  1423  A.H., corresponding to 17-18 April 2002 A.D., the Shari'ah Standard Committee discussed   the  exposure  draft  of the  Shari'ah  standard  on  commercial papers and asked the consultant  to make  necessary amendments to reflect the comments  and observations  made by the members  of the Committee. The Committee  discussed the exposure draft of the standard  in its  meeting held  in the Kingdom of Bahrain  on 6-7 Rabi'  II,  1423  A.H.,  corresponding to  17-18  June  2002 A.D.,  and  introduced   necessary  amendments  as per observations  and comments  of the members.
The exposure draft cf the standard  was also discussed by the Committee in its meeting  held  in Amman,  the Hashemite  Kingdom  of Jordan  on  17
Rabi'  II,   1423   A.H.,   corresponding  to  28   June  2002  A.D.,   and  further amendments  were incorporated  in the standard.
The revised  exposure  draft  cf the  Shari'ah  standard  was presented  to the  Shari'ah  Board  in its 9th  meeting  held  in Makkah  Al-Mukarramah during  the  period  of 11-16  Ramadan  1423  A.H.,  corresponding to  16-21
November  2002 AD.  The Shari'ah  Board  made further  amendments to the



450





Shari'ah Standard  No  (16):  Comm ercial  Papers

exposure draft of the standard  and decided that it be sent to specialists and interested  parties  in order  to obtain their  comments  in preparation   for its discussion  in a listenig session.

A public  hearing  was held  in Bahrain  on  18  Dhul-Hajjah   1423  A.H., corresponding  to  19  February  2003 A.D.  The public hearing  was attended by more than thirty participants  representing central banks, institutions, accounting   firms,   Shari'ah   scholars,  academics   and  others  interested  in the  field.   The  members  of the  Shari'.ah   Standards   Committees   (1)  and
(2)  responded  to the written  comments  that were sent prior  to the public hearing  as well as to the oral comments  that were expressed  in the public hearing.

The Shari'ah Standards  Committees  (1)  and (2)  held a joint meeting on 2
Muharram  1424 A.H.,  corresponding  to 5 March 2003  A.D., to discuss the comments  made during the public hearing as well as comments  received in writing.  The two Committees made the amendments  considered  necessary.

The Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. (10) held in Al-Madinah  Al• Munawwarah  during  the period  of 2-7 Rabi' I,  1424  A.H.,  corresponding to  3-8 May 2003 A.D,,  discussed  the  amendments  made  by the  Shari'ah
Standards  Committee   and  made  amendments  considered   suitable.  The Shari'ah Board unanimously  adopted  some of the items, while other  items were adopted  by a predominant majority  vote, as recorded  in the minutes of the meetings  of the Shari'ah  Board.

The Shari'ah Standards Review Committee  reviewed the standard in its meeting  held on Rabi' II,  1433  A.H.,  corresponding  to March  2012  A.D., in the State  of Qatar,  and proposed  after deliberation  a set  of amendments (additions, deletions, and rephrasing) as deemed  necessary, and then submitted  the proposed  amendments to the Shari'ah  Board  for approval as it deemed  necessary.
1n  its meeting No. (41) held in Al-Madinah  Al-Munwwarah, Kingdom of Saudi  Arabia  during  the period  of 27-29 Sha'ban  1436  A.H.,  corresponding to  14-16 June 2015 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed  the proposed amendments  submitted  by the Shari'ah Standards  Review Committee.  After deliberation, the Shari'ah Board approved  necessary  amendments, and the standard  was adopted  in its  current  amended  version.



451





Shari'ah Standard  Na (16):  Commercial  Papers





Appendix  (B)

The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Dealings in Commercial Papers
The basis  for the  permissibility  of dealing  in a bill of exchange is that it is  in the meaning of Hawalah or Qard (loan)  contract,  which are agreed upon  by ljma'  (consensus  of  Fuqaha),  or  in the  mea• ning  of Suftajah  (demand  note),  which  is  valid  according  to  the preponderant   opinion.   The  evidence  for  this   is  the  report  from a number  of Companions  (may  Allah  be pleased with them)  who dealt in these instruments.  It is  reported  from Abdullah Ibn Abbas (may Allah  be pleased with him) that he used to take silver from tra• ders at Mecca and write  down a demand note for them to be paid at Kufa.  It is  related from Abdullah Ibn Al-Zubayr that he used to take dirhams  from traders  at Mecca and then  write  a note drawn upon his brother Mus'ab in Iraq.  When Ibn Abbas was asked about this, he saw no harm in the transaction. AI-Muwaffaq Ibn Qudamah," may Allah confor mercy upon him, has related from Ali (may Allah   be pleased with him)  that he was asked about a similar transaction  and he saw no harm in it.  Further, in the Suftajah is the interest of both the lender and the borrower without harm being caused to either one of them. The lender is secure against the danger of the highway in trans• porting his dirhams to the destined town, while the borrower benefits from the loan and is  also secure against the dangers of the highway being under an obligation to pay in the said town.  The Shari'ah  does not lay down a prohibition  for interests that do no invoke harm.

(3)  This has been related  by A!-Bayhaqi  in Al-Sunan Al-Kubra" [5:  352];  and see Muhammad
Nasir AI-Albani,  Irwa' Al-Ghali! Fi Takhrij Ahadith Manar AI-Sabi!" [5:  328].
(4)  41-Maughn" [6:  436].



452





Shari'ah Standar d No  (16):  Comm ercial  Papers

• Shaykh  Al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah  (may Allah confer mercy upon him) has said:  "The  correct  view is  that  of permissibility,  because  both  the lender  and  the borrower  benefit  from  such  raising  of a loan,  and  the Shari'ah does not proscribe what benefits them and is  in their interest; it proscribes what is  harmful  for them." In addition  to this, there is  no text that prohibits  a Suftajah nor is  such meaning  implied by the texts. It is, therefore, necessary to maintain its permissibility,, especially when there is a general need fr it.""
The  basis  for  the  permissibility  of a promissory  note  is that  it  is
considered  a document  acknowledging a debt,  and  Allah,  the  Al• Mighty, has commanded the securing of debts, as He, the A-Mighty says:   {"O you  who believe! When you  contract  a debt for  a fixed period,  write it down.  Let a scribe write it down in justice  between y0u..?'}0
■   The permissibility; ct a cheque  drawn  by the client upon  a bank, with which he has a balance is that it is  in the nature  of Hawalah.  The Muhil (transferor) is  the accountholder, the Muhal is  the beneficiary and the Muhal Alayh (transferee)  is  the drawee bank.
The permissibility of a cheque  drawn  by the lient  upon  a bank with
which  he does  not  have a balance  is  that  it  is  Hawalah.  This  view is held  by those  who do  not  stipulate  for the permissibility  ct Hawalah that the transferee  be indebted  to the Muha! (transferor)  with Hawalah (transfer)  being valid for a person who does not owe a prior debt. Some jurists call this absolute Hawalah a Hawalah upon one with no liability. The  second  view is  that  it  is  an agency  for  borrowing,  and  both  are (independently) valid. This rule, however, is contingent upon the cheque no invoking Riba by way ct an overdraft,  for banks usually do not lend without  interest.  Banks will not  accept  cheques  drawn  upon  them  by clients with no balance except by charging  Riba-bearing  profits that are due firom  the client along with  the value ct the cheque.  Consequently, if the  cheque  drawn  by the  client  upon  the  bank,  where  he does  not

(5)  Maj? Al-Fatawa" [29:  531].
(6) See:  41-Maughnt" [6: 437]; Majm? Al-Fatawa" [20: 515]  and [29: 531]; and Ibn Qayyim
Al-Jawziyyah,  "Tahdhib Sunan Abu Dawud" [5:  152].
(7)  [AI-Baqarah  (The Cow):  282].



453





Sh ari'ah  Standard No (16):  Commercial Papers

have a balance,  includes  Riba-bearing  profits  it is  prohibited;  it is  not permissible to write such a cheque  nor to undertake  transactions  in it. The basis for the permissibility of dealing in crossed and account payee cheques,  and the obligation of the payee bank to abide by the conditions
stipulated  by the  accountholder  for  the  two types  of cheque,  is the
generality  of the Hadith  stating:  "Muslims abide  by the conditions   they stipulate " The reason is  that such a condition  promotes the inherent interest  of the contract.  Further,  the primary  principle  for  conditions and contracts  is  that of permissibility.
Endorsement
The  basis for the  permissibility  of endorsement   is that  it  does  not  go beyond the meaning  of either Hawalah (transfer)  or Wakalah (agency),  and both are permissible.

Discounting of Commercial Papers
■   The basis for  not  permitting  discounting  of commercial  paper  is  that in reality the discounting  of commercial paper amounts  to a loan  with interest. What affirms this is that the interest charged through discounting varies according  to the value of the commercial  paper  and  its date  of maturity,  and loan  with interest is  prohibited by agreement.
The permissibility  of  paying less than  the value of  the paper, when the transaction   is   between  the  holder  and  the  first  beneficiary,  is  that  it belongs to the category of the issue  known  as "negotiating  a def zrred debt  for part  of it paid  promptly"  This  is  what  is  known  as Da' Wa Taajjal  (reduce   the  amount   for  hastening   payment),   and  according to one opinion  it  is  permissible  to undertake  such a transaction.  The evidence that supports  permissibility  is  the Hadith  of lbn Abbas (may
Allah be pleased  with him),  stating;:  "When  the Prophet  (peace be upon
him)  decided to  expell  Banu  Al-Nadir,  they said,  O Messenger of Allah,

(8)  This Hadith  has been related   by a  number of  reporters   of  Hadith.  See  "Sunan  Al• Tirmidhf" [4: 584] Al-Hakim, 4lMustadrak" [4: 101]; and SunanA!-Daraqutnr" [3: 27]. The Hadith  has been narrated   by Amr Ibn Awf and is connected   to the Prophet  (peace be upon him). It has a number  of different Isnad (chains of transmission)  to the  Prophet. This is why A!-Bukhari  related it in his "Sahi" [4: 451]  as a Mallaq  (Suspended) Hadith. Muhammad Nasir Al-Albani  has investigated  the chains of transmission   of this Hadith Irwa'  AL-Ghalil"  [5:  142-146]  and concluded that the Hadith  is generally authentic in view of the number af its  Isnads.



454





Shari'ah  Standard  No (16):  Commercial  Papers

you have  ordered  our expulsion  when  we have  against people debt claims that  are not yet due.'  The Prophet  (peace  be upon  him) said,  'Reduce  the amounts  to  hasten  payments." Ibn  Abbas (may  Allah be pleased with him), was asked  about the issue  of a person who has a deferred claim against another, and he says to the debtor, "Hasten the payment  and I will reduce the amount for you", so Ibn Abbas  responded saying, "There is  no harm in it': Ibn Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him), was the narrator of the previous Hadith.  Further, this issue  is the opposite of the issue of Riba. That is, Riba  involves an excess in both the period and the amount, whicb is entirely  harmful for tbe debtor,  whereas this  issue involves  the absolving of the liability  ct the debtor with respect to the debt  with a benefit coming to the  creditor through prompt payment. Each one of them benefits  without being subjected to barm. This  is different from Riba,  the prohibition of whicb is agreed  upon and that causes injury to the debtor.  'The benefit in Riha is  exclusively for the creditor (owner of capital). Thus, this case differs from Riba in both form and meaning. Tbe reason is that the excess in Riba  as a counter-value for the period leads to a grave hardship,  for a single dirbam is  doubled and multiplied keeping the Dhimmah (liability) engaged without any corresponding  benefit. In the case of reduction  of the amount and bastening of payment,  the liability ct the debtor is  removed and the prompt payment benefits the creditor.  The  Law-giver  encourages the  discbarging of debt liabilities. The debtor has been called a person imprisoned by difficulties,  and thus in  the discharging his  liability is  a release   from these  shackles.  This  is different  from his remaining patiently burdened with an excess.9

(9) This  Hadith   has been related    by  a  number of Hadith reporters.  See:  AlTahawi, "Sharh Mushkil  Al-Athar"  [11:  56];  A!-Bayhaqi,  Al-Sunan  AL-Kubra"  [6:  28];  "Sunan Al-Daraqutnf [3:  46];  and Al-Hakim ,   "Al-Mustadrak"  [2:  52].  bn Al-Qayyim  said in Ighathat Al-Lahfan"  [2:  11]:  This  Hadith  has been related as per  relation  conditions of  "Al-Sunan  AI-Kubra".  AI-Bayhaqi  has classified  the Hadith as weak  but  the men in the chain of transmission  of the Hadith are trustw orthy.  However,  the Hadith has been classified  as weak due  to  Muslim   Ibn  Khalid who is a narrator  in  the chain af transmission  af the Hadith. Nevertheless, he is a trustworthy  and reliable jurist as Imam Shafi'i has related  Hadiths  through him and regard his view as authoritative.
(10)  "Ighathat Al-Lahfan" [2:  1I];  and "T'lam AI-Muwaqqf'in"  [3:  313].



455





Sh ari'ah  Standar d No  (16):  Comm ercial  Pa pe rs

The basis for treating  commercial paper as a price for ascertained goods is that  it amounts to the  sale of a debt,  to a person  other  than  the one who owes it, for ascertained goods. This  is permitted according  to the Maliki school  if it takes  place after possession  so that  it does  not  turn into the delaying  of the two counter-values.  A resolution  pertaining to this has been  issued  by the Islamic Fiqh Academy  of the Organization of Islamic  Conference.D
Taking  Possession of Commercial  Papers
• The basis for considering  a cheque, whether  certified or one of the same type,  as possession  of the  amount  mentioned in it,  is  that  a cheque  is secured by  a large  number  of guarantees  that  make  the  possessor  the owner  of its  contents.  The beneficiary in this case is  able to undertake transactions  in it by selling,  buying or by making a gift. Further,  there  is a strong protection provided  by state governments to support confidence in cheques. In addition to this, relying upon a cheque means the existence of sufficient  funds to cover its amount  with  the certifier  undertaking to retain  the funds  until  the end of the period  fixed for  payment.  It is  for this  reason that people in general pref zr  certified  cheques  over cash for large  transactions.
• The  basis  for  not  considering  an uncertified cheque,  or  one  that  is
similar  to it as far as the possession  of its amount is  concerned,  is  the probability that there is no balance  to cover it or there is an insufficient balance. 'The basis for possession  is customary practice, and a resolution has been  passed  by the  Islamic  Fiqh Academy  deeming  the receipt  of a certified  cheque  as possession.
The basis for the permissibility of dealing in cheques for bank transf 2rs,
when the  intention  is  to transfer  the same currency  in which  payment is  to  be made,  is  that  it  belongs  to the  category  of Suftajah, which  is permissible  according  to one out of two opinions of the jurists.
Payment Guarantees for the Value of Commercial Paper
• The basis for considering a guarantee  for acceptance as an undertaking and an obligation  on the part of the drawee to pay to the legal holder, on

(I1)  In its  16  session held in Mecca on  21-26 Shawwal  1422  A.H.



456





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (16):  Commercial Papers

the date of maturity, the amount  of debt stated on the bill of exchange, is that this undertaking and obligation is to be fulfilled according to the Shari'ah. This requirement  is due to the generality of the words of Allah,
the Exalted, saying:  {"O you who believe! Flfil (your) obligations"},
as well as due to the generality;  ct the saying of the Prophet  (peace be upon him):  "Muslims  abide  by the conditions they stiplate.3
The  conditions   a person  stipulates  for himself,  and  by which  he  is bound, are included in this meaning. There is also the Hadith ofJabir Ibn Abdullah  (may Allah be pleased with him), who said:  "The Messenger of  Allah  (peace  be  upon  him)   did  not  pray  over  (the   funeral  of) a person  who  died  while  owing  a debt   A dead  person  was brought to  him  (for  prayers)  and  he said,  'Does  he owe  a debt?  'The people replied,  'Yes,  he owes two  dinars'  At this Abu Qatadah  Al-Ansari  said,
'The  two  dinars  are on me,  O Messenger  of Allah?  The Messenger  of
Allah (peace be upon him)  then offered the funeral prayers for him.09
In this Hadith, we notice that Abu Qatadah  Al-Ansari  (may Allah be pleased  with  him)  offers  an  undertaking and  accepts  the  obligation to  pay  the  debt  owed  by the  deceased,  and  this  is accepted  by  the Prophet  (peace be upon him). In fact, this undertaking and obligation given by Abu Qatadah  were deemed  sufficient to absolve the deceased from  all liability  for the debt.  In some different  texts of the Hadith,  it has been reported  that after the statement  of Abu Qatadah  (The two dinars  are on me),  "The Prophet (peace  be upon him) said,  'The right
of the creditor  is due  and   the deceased  is absolved of it'  Abu Qatadah
responded   in the  affirmative,  so the  Prophet   (peace  be  upon  him) prayed  over him?9 The removal  of all liability for the debt from  the deceased  was  due  to  the  undertaking  and  obligation  given  by Abu Qatadah  (may  Allah be pleased  with  him),  to pay the debt due form this  person  and  because  of which  he became  indebted  to  the  extent

(12)   [A1-Ma' idah (The  Table):  1].
( 13)   The source of the Hadith is stated earlier.
(14)  This text of  the Hadith has been related  by  Abu   Dawud in  his Sunan"  [9:   193].
However,  the Hadith has origin in the two authentic  books of  Hadith. See:  Sahih
Al- Bukhari" [2:  467]  and Sahih Muslim" [3:  1237]  (H:  1619).
(15)  This narration  has been related by Imam Ahmad in his "Musnad" [3:  330].



457





Shari'ah Standar d No  (16):  Comm ercial  Papers

of two dinars. Al-Muwaffaq Ibn Qudamah   (may Allah confer mercy upon him)  said:  "The words of the Prophet  (peace  be upon  him):  'The deceased  is absolved  of it' mzan  that 'you have now become  subject to the claim for two dinars'  This  is  by way of emphasis  for  establishing the claim against him as well as the obligation  to pay.9
The  basis  for  permitting  the  holder  of commercial   paper  to  have recourse  to all persons  who have signed  the  paper  is  that by doing  s they bind themselves  to the  extent of the value of the  paper  in case of non-payment.  'The Ulama  arrived  at a consensus  on the permissibility of guarantees  on the whole.
• The basis for the permissibility  of guarantees  through  tangible  assets is that these  are treated  as Rahn  (mortgage)  and  are governed  by the same rules that  apply  to Rahn.  The Ulema  arrived  at a  consensus  for
the permissibility  of Rahn (Mortgage).































(16)  "A1-Maughn+" [7:  85].



458





Shari'ah Standard  Na (16):  Commercial  Papers





Appendix (C)
Definitions


Commercial  Papers

Tradable certificates that represent pecuniary  rights payable at sight or after a short period. Customary practice  regards them as instruments  of payment and they act as substitutes for cash in transactions.

Bill of Exchange

A certificate issued in a particular legal form.  It consists of an order from a person (known  as the drawer)  to another person (known as the drawee) to pay a certain sum of money at sight,  or at a particular  or determinable date, to a third person (called the beneficiary).

Promissory Note

A certificate whereby the issuer promises to pay a certain sum ct money at a particular or determinable  date,  or at sight,  to another person (called the beneficiary).

Cheque

A certificate that is  issued  in a particular form containing  an order is• sued by a person  (known as the payer) to another  person (known as the payee)  to pay a certain  sum of money to  a third  person  (known as the beneficiary) when the cheque is presented.

Crossed Cheque

A cheque written  in the form of an ordinary cheque except that it is distinguished by two parallel  lines on the face of the cheque.  The cross• ing places an obligation upon the payee bank not to pay the value of the cheque to  a person  other than  a client of the payee bank or to another bank.



459





Sh ari'ah  Standar d No  (16):  Comm ercial  Pa pe rs

Certified Cheque

A cheque  written  in the form  of an ordinary cheque  and  distinguished by the  word  "certified" or "accepted"  or whatever gives this  meaning,   on the  face of the  cheque  along  with the  date  and  the  address ct the  payee bank with  the signatures of the certifying official  whereby the payee bank certifies  the authenticity of the  signature of the payer  and  the existence  of sufficient  funds  in his account for  payment of the value  of the  cheque  to
the beneficiary.

Banker's Cheque (Bank Draft)

A cheque  issued  by the payee bank  (to its client)  guaranteeing payment
ct the value  ct the cheque  to a third party. Account Payee  Cheque
A cheque  written  in the form  of an ordinary cheque  to which  the issuer
adds  a statement indicating that  its value  should not  be paid  in cash, but upon  conditions stated, like a statement written  on the  face of the  cheque saying "Account Payee" or any other  statement bearing  the same meaning.

Travellers' Cheque

Cheques  drawn   in  varying  values  by  institutions  upon  their   foreign branches  or correspondent institutions in the interest  ct a traveller who will receive  their  value  by merely  presenting them  fer  payment to a party  that will accept them.

Cheques  for Bank Transfers
A cheque  written  by an institution, upon  the  request  of a person, who intends   to  remit  his  cash  through the  institution,  by way of cheques,  to another location,  so that  he,  his  agent,  or any other  person  may receive it.

Endorsement

A  legal  act  by  means  of which  ownership  in the  commercial  paper  is transferred from one person  (known  as endorser)  to another person  (known as the endorsee), or it has the effect, through  a statement, ct creating an agency for collection or a mortgage.





Shari'ah Standard  No  (16):  Commercial  Papers

Discounting of Commercial Papers
A process by means of which the holder of commercial paper,  through an endorsement, transfers ownership in it to a third party prior to the date of maturity  with the  institution  discounting  the value by  a determined amount in lieu of early payment.

Acceptance to Pay
The undertaking  by  the drawee to pay the value of the bill of exchange to the lawful holder at the date of its maturity.

Guarantee or Guarantor

The bank as guarantor  provides a guarantee to  the holder  for paying the value of the commercial paper by way of a guarantor  along with other signatories if the primary debtor refuses to pay.

Tangible Guarantees

These are guarantees  stipulated  by  the holder  of commercial  paper through the creation of a mortgage on real estate, or a mortgage of movables, like commercial paper or negotiable instruments that the debtor endorses over to the holder by way of mortgage or goods that the debtor delivers to the holder as a security for payment.


























461


























