Standard No.  (14)



Documentary Credit


(Revised Standard)












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        396

I.  Scope of the Standard ............so. sos«s o s.s o.sso .s o.ss. sos.so s . s o..o ....                     396
2.  Definition, Types and Characteristics of: Documentary Credit .........        396
3. Shari'ah   Ruling on Documentary Credit..............................................        399

4.  Date cf Issuance of the Standard............................................................        405
Adoption cl the Standard......................................................................        406
Appendices
Appendix (a)   Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard.............       407
Appendix (b):  Ihe Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard..............ca......         410
Appendix (c):   Definitions.............................................................................         415




























393








IN  THE NAME OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all  the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all  his companions





Preface


The purpose  of this standard  is  to  define documentary  credits, their characteristics, Shari'ah rules and regulations so as to facilitate transactions in them by the Islamic financial Institutions  (Institution/Institutions).0

































(1) The  word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



395





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit





Statement of the Standard


I. Scope of the Standard

This standard  covers documentary  credit extended  by  an Institution, either on the basis of client orders or for the use of the institution itself including all types and forms  of documentary  credit, the various  stages of their execution  and the relationships created between the parties to the transaction.

2.Definition, Types and Characteristics of Documentary Credit

2/1  Definition of documentary credit

A documentary credit is  a written undertaking  by a bank (known as the issuer)  given to the seller (the beneficiary) as per the buyer's (applicant's or orderer's) instruction or is  issued by the bank for its own use, undertaking  to pay up to a specified amount (in cash or through  acceptance or discounting  of a bill  of exchange),  within a certain period of time,  on condition that the seller presents docu• ments for the goods conforming  to the instructions.

In brief, a documentary credit is an undertaking by a bank to pay sub•
ject to conformity of the documents to the contractual instructions.

2/2  Procedural stages of documentary credit

2/2/1  The stage of concluding a credit contract: This stage precedes credit,  and the contract  concluded  is  usually a sale contract in which the seller stipulates that the price be paid through documentary  credit,  however,  the  contract  may be a lease contract,  agency with commission  or any other contract.

2/2/2 The stage of requesting the opening of credit:  At this stage the buyer requests the bank to open the credit   so that the seller can be notified.



396





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary   Credit

2/2/3 The stage of issuing credit and notifying the seller: At this stage, the bank  issues  and sends  the letter  of documentary credit  to the buyer, either directly or through an intermediary bank.

2/2/4 The stage of executing  the credit:  At this stage, the beneficiary presents the documents stipulated  in the letter of credit  to the bank. The bank examines  them  in accordance with the  credit conditions. Ifthe documents conform to instructions, the bank accepts them, executes the credit and delivers the documents to the buyer,  in case it is  not the institution  itself,  after the receipt of partial  or  full payment  of the  value  or  receives  a deed  ct commitment to pay on the date of maturity so that the buyer is able to receive the goods  represented by the documents.  If the documents do not conform to instructions, the  bank reserves the right to accept, reject or seek amendment of the documents.

2/2/5  Coverage by correspondents:  If more than  one bank participate in the execution of credit, the accounts  are settled in accordance with the terms of coverage agreed upon between the banks.

2/3  Types of documentary credit

2/3/1  Basic classification

Documentary  credit  is  classified,   according to  the  strength ct the undertaking into two types;  namely  (I) revocable  cred• it,  which  can  be  amended   or  cancelled   without   consulting the beneficiary, and (II) irrevocable  credit, which cannot be amended or cancelled  without  the consent  of the parties.

2/3/3  Other  classifications

There  are other classifications of documentary  credit. 'These include  the following:
Transf rable documentary credit: This credit entitles the benefi• ciary to request  the executing  bank to make the credit available, partially  or totally,  to another  beneficiary  or beneficiaries.
Back-to-back  credit, which means the credit issued is guaranteed
by another  credit.



397





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit

■ Revolving or renewable  credit, which  means  the beneficiary  can repeatedly  submit new documents for new operations within the limits of the credit amount  and during  its permissibility.
• Red clause or advance payment  credit whereby the bank is allowed
to pay a certain  percentage  of the credit before submission  of the documents, against  an undertaking by  the  beneficiary  to repay that amount  ifthe goods are not shipped or the beneficiary fiks to
use the credit during the period of its permissibility. Such payment may be made against a letter of guarantee  from the beneficiary.
• Import and export  credit  (depending on the issuing bank).
■ Local and foreign  credit.
Confirmed and non-confirmed  credits.
Partial shipment  and a non-partial  shipment credit.
On sight or immediate payment credit,  deferred payment cred•
it,  acceptance credit  and negotiable credit.
• Syndicated  credit   (partnership  credit),  which   describes  the state of participation by more  than  one bank  due  to the  huge amount   of credit  granted with  each bank  providing a letter  of guarantee, to the extent  of its participation, to the leading bank.
• Standby credit  (guarantee  credit).  This credit  resembles  letters of guarantee with  a clause  that  payment  is  conditional  upon beneficiary's (in  this case the contractor's)  failure  to perform.
2/4 Characteristics  of documentary credit

2/4/1  Dealing  in documentary credit takes place on the basis of the documents alone and is executed without reference to the goods. Documentary credit,  in essence.  makes  it binding  for the bank to execute the credit whenever  the beneficiary presents,  within the  duration  of the  validity  of the  contract,  the  documents required by the credit and conforming to the instructions.

2/4/2  Opening  of credit  by the  buyer  (orderer),  though   it  may  be acted upon  with certainty,  is  not considered  a final payment  of the price of the goods. The buyer remains  liable for the payment
until  the  bank  pays  the value  of the  documents,  however.  the



398





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary   Credit

seller (beneficiary)  does not have  a right  to request  payment from the buyer as long  as the credit subsists and  is valid.  If the credit expires before the submission of the documents,  the seller has the right to claim payment directly from the buyer, because expiry of the credit in itself does not amount  to revocation  of the sale contract.
2/4/3 The bank is  obliged to pay the value of the credit  to the ben• eficiary when the latter presents  the documents  that conform to  instructions,  except upon  proof of fraud  or forgery  of the documents,  or in the case of a court decision declaring the sale contract  null and void.

2/4/4 Interpretation   of the  duties  and obligations  of the  parties  to documentary credit  are subject  to International   Commercial Terms  (INCOTERMS  2000) and  the  Uniform  Customs  and Practices for  Documentary Credit  (UCP  500)  when reference is  made to INCOTERMS in the sale contract  and to UCP in documentary credit.
3. Shari'ah  Ruling  on Documentary Credit

3/1   Permissibility of documentary credit

3/1/1  Dealing  in documentary   credit  includes  agency for  providing procedural  services,  the most important  of which is  the exam• ination of documents,  and the provision of institutional guaran• tee to the importer. As both agency and guarantee contracts are permissible, documentary  credit becomes permissible subject to the conditions stipulated  in this standard.

3/1/2  Opening  of all  types  of documentary   credit,  its  issuance  and confirmation, on the basis of the client's order or for the institution itself,  are permitted  to  an Institution.  It  is  also permissible  to
an institution to participate, or play an intermediary role, in such dealings and to notify,,  amend or execute in any way such credit, either for its own use or on behalf of another institution  or bank, according  to  the  available  forms  of executing  documentary credit,  subject to item  (3/1/3)  below.



399





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary Credit

3/1/3  It is not permissible for the institution  to undertake transactions in documentary   credit,  in accordance  with  what  is  stated  in item  (3/1/2),  either for  itself or on  behalf of another as a client or  institution   or  by  way of collaboration,  when  such  credit
pertains  to goods that are prohibited by the Sharf'ah,  or is based on a contract that is  void or irregular (according to the Shari'ah) due to vitiating conditions  or includes interest, either charged
or paid,  whether explicitly as in the case of loan upon payment by the beneficiary of amounts  not fully or partially covered in similar credit, or impliedly,  as in the case of discounts or trading (payment) on bills of exchange with deferred and delayed payments.

It is  stipulated  for  the permissibility  of the  subject  of docu• mentary  credit that the contract  upon which reliance is placed be a contract  that  is  valid  in the  Shari'ah  insofar  as  its  ele• ments,  conditions  and type  of transaction,  whether  currency exchange,  ordinary  sale or  another,  are concerned,  and  also with respect  to its specific additional  conditions.
3/1/4  The  bank is  obliged  to  execute the  credit  when  it  conforms to instructions,  except upon  proof of fraud  or forgery of the documents,  in which case it  is  under  no obligation  to execute it.  Provided  that  if the  contract concluded  prior  to opening of documentary  credit  is nullified  by a court  decision,  the execution of the credit is  subject to a new agreement.

3/2 The contract preceding the opening of credit

3/2/1   It  is permissible for the seller to stipulate in the sale contract that payment  be made through  documentary  credit. Such  a  condi• tion is valid and its  performance  is  binding upon the buyer

3/2/2 It   is   permissible  to  secure  international  transactions  using documentary  credit  provided  that  the  secured  transactions do not violate the rules of the Shari'ah.



400





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit

3/2/3 When    the   contract   stipulates    that   its   interpretation   is subject  to INCOTERMS   (issue 2000) or the  United  Nation's Convention  in respect  of the International sale of goods  or any other  reference, then such potential  interpretation is circumscribed with  a condition   that  it  must  not  violate  the rules of the Shari'ah.  [see  item  3/2/2]

3/3  Commissions and expenses  in documentary credit

3/3/1  It is  permissible for the institution to charge actual  expenses incurred in issuing  documentary credit. It is  also permissible for the  institution  to charge  a fe for providing  the required services,  whether  such a fee  is  in the form  of  a lump  sum  or a certain  percentage of the credit  amount, provided  that the duration  of the  credit  is   not  considered in determining the commission.  This  rule applies  to services  rendered  for both import  and  export  credit,  except where  the  amendment in• volves  a rescheduling of the duration  ct the credit  facility.  It is, therefore, permissible for the institution to charge only the actual  expenses  incurred,  in which  case it will be a definite sum and not a percentage.

The Institution  must abide  by the following conditions:

a) The aspect ct guarantee per se must not be taken into account when  estimating  fees  for  documentary  credit.  Accordingly, it  is  not permissible  for  an institution  to charge an amount in  addition  to  the  actual  expenses  incurred   if  it   endorses a credit  facility issued  by,  another  bank,  because  endorsing a credit  facility is  an addition  over guarantee.  The  rule for endorsement   applies  to  participation   in  the issuance  and endorsement   ct credit  as  well as  issuance  of standby  credit
(guarantee  credit),  as long  as services or obligations  are  not
required.

b )The issuance  of a credit facility should not involve  Riba bear•
ing profits or become a means for such profits.



401





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit

c)  It  is  not  permissible  to use a combination   of contracts  in documentary credit as an excuse for involvement in the prohibited  transactions,  such  as taking  a commission   for providing a guarantee  or extending  a loan.

3/3/2 The  rule  of item  3/3/1  above equally applies to  receiving  or payment   of  commissions   and  expenses  and  in  a  situation where the institution  acts as an intermediary in these respects, irrespective of whether  the transaction  is between  the institu• tion  and its client (the orderer  or beneficiary)  or between  the institution  and other institutions  and banks.

3/3/3  The  ruling  of commission  for  providing  letters  of guarantee that was stated in the Shari'ah Standard  No.  (5) on Guarantees must be applied when determining commissions  fer the letters ct guarantee   that  accompany  documentary  credits,  such  as letters  of guarantee  provided  in the case of advance  payment of a portion  of the  amount  or the  shipping  guarantee  that  is issued  for releasing the goods before the arrival of documents.

3/4  Guarantees in documentary credits

3/4/1  It   is   permissible  for  the  institution  to  secure  the obligations arising out of documentary  credit,  or to provide documentary credit as security for payment in favour of institutions and banks dealing with it.  The institution  may act  as an intermediary for facilitating documentary  credit using other permissible and acceptable   forms  of guarantee.   It is,  therefore   permissible to  use  a number  ct means  as a cover for  documentary   credit including  cash,  freezing of permissible accounts and negotiable instruments valid according to the Shari'ah, certificates ct shares in real estate and withholding  the documents  cf the credit that stand  for the goods.

The  cover  of a documentary  credit  may  be  also  one  of the following: a transferable letter of credit; a back-to-back  letter of credit;  a letter of guarantee issued by the bank of the beneficiary



402





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit

against  the advance  payment  in  case  of advanced  payment credits;   a  letter  of guarantee  issued   by  a  bank participating in the issuance  or confirmation  of the credit;  relinquishment receivables and commercial papers, such as bill of exchange and promissory  notes.  This item  must be read together  with item
3/4/2 below.

3/4/2 It is not permissible for the institution  to accept the following types of guarantees:  interest-based  bonds,  shares of companies that deal in prohibited activities, and interest-based receivables. It is also  not  permissible   for the  institution   to provide  any of these  guarantees  as  security   for  its  obligation   to  other institutions or banks or to act as an intermediary to facilitate such guarantees.

3/4/3 I is  permissible  for  the  institution  and  the  applicant   for documentary credit to agree on investing the cash cover of the credit in accordance  with Mudarabah  partnership.

3/5 Murabahah transactions in documentary credit

When  a client intends to purchase  imported  goods from the institu• tion through  Murabahah   financing of the documentary credit,  the following must be observed:

3/5/1  Opening   of  documentary   credit  should   not  precede   the conclusion  of the sale contract  between  the  orderer  and  the beneficiary   (the  seller)  irrespective  of  the  orderer  having taken  possession  of the goods  that  are the subject-matter  of the contract.
3/5/2 Institution  should   be  the  party   who  purchases   from  the supplier,   and  then  sells  to  the  client  through   Murabahah as per the rulings stated in Shari'ah Standard  No. (8) on Murabahah,  while taking  into  account  item  2/2/2  in respect to cancellation  of contract  and item  3/1/3  in respect to agency in Murabahah.



403





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit

3/6 Musharakah contract with the client to finance  documentary credit for imported goods
3/6/1  In case the institution signs  a partnership contract with  the client  to purchase goods  prior  to the opening of credit  and before the client concludes a sale contract with the supplier, it is permissible to open the credit in the name of either partner. It is  permissible for the institution,  after receipt  of the goods, to  sell  its share  to  a third   party or  to  its partner through a spot or deferred payment Murabahah on the condition that the sale to the partner is not based  on an earlier  exchange  of binding promises or stipulated  in the Musharakah contract.

3/6/2 It is permissible  for the institution  to sign a partnership contract with the client in respect cf goods  purchased  by the client on the  condition that  the institution  does not sell  its  share to the client on a def zrred payment  basis.

3/7 General rules

3/7/1  If the credit transaction  includes a provision  that it  is subject to the prevalent  principles  and practices  that unify documentary credit,  it  is   necessary   to  qualify  such  a  statement   with  the stipulation  that it will not violate Shari'ah rules and principles.  It is  pref arable that the institution presents alternatives  that could be agreed upon between the institution  and the correspondent banks.

It is a requirement to explicitly state that a provision stipulating interest  will not be acted upon,  and  also for trading  activities that   contravene  the provisions   of  the   Shari'ah.   For  valid substitutes. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (17) on Commercial Papers,  items  5/2 and 5/3)

3/7/2  It is  not permissible for  the  institution  to  discount   accepted bills cf exchange,  i.e.  to purchase  these bills before maturity at less than  their  nominal  value.



404





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit

3/7/3  It is not permissible  for the institution  to trade in deferred pay• ment documents  or accepted bills of exchange, i.e.  to purchase these  instruments at less  than  their  nominal  value.  It is also not  permissible  for the institution   to act as an intermediary, whether  by payment  or notification,  between  the beneficiary and the issuing or confirming  bank to facilitate such dealings.

3/7/4 It is not permissible for the institution  to negotiate, for less than their  nominal  value,  documents  payable on  sight  or  payable bills of exchange.
3/7/5  It  is   not  permissible  for  the institution,  as far as possible,  to present  bills of exchange that  it  undertakes  to  pay  LO    clients whose debts to the institution  are  represented by these bills,  so as to get them discounted by other banks that may accept them.

3/7/6 The  institution   should  arrange  its  relationships   with  other institutions   and  correspondent  banks  on  the  basis  of non• payment  of interest  and  avoidance  of prohibited transactions with respect to covering operations  between the correspondent banks  when  such  relationships   involve  settlement   of inter• bank obligations resulting from documentary credit and other banking  operations.

4. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued  on 7 Rabi' I,  1424  A.H., corresponding to 8 May
2003A.D.


















405





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit





Adoption of the Standard


The  Sharf'ah  Standard  on  Documentary  Credits  was adopted   by  the Shari'ah Board in its meeting No (10) held in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah during  the  period  of 2-7 Rabi  I,   1424  A.H.,  corresponding to  3-8 May
2003 A.D.











































406





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its  meeting  No.  (5)  held   in  Makkah Al-Mukarramah   during  the period of 8-12 Ramadan 1421  A.H., corresponding  to 4-8 December 2000
A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Board resolved to give  priority  to the preparation  ct
a Shari'ah Standard on Documentary Credit.

On  Monday 29 Ramadan  1421  A.H.,  corresponding  to 25 December
2000 A.D.,  a Shari'ah  consultant was commissioned  to prepare a Shari'ah study and an exposure draft.

In its meeting held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 15 and 16  Safar  1422
A.H.,  corresponding  to 9 and  10  May 200 I  A.D.,  the  Shari'ah Studies Committee  discussed  the  juristic  study  of the  standard  and  requested the consultant  to  incorporate  the necessary amendments  in the light ct the conclusions  ct the Committee and the observations of members.  The Committee also discussed the exposure draft in its  10th  meeting held  in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 14 Rabi'  I,  1422 A.H.,  corresponding to 6 June
2001  A.D.,  and made some amendments to the exposure draft.

In its meeting No.  (II}  held  in Jordan  on 18  and  19  Jumada  II,  1422
A.H., corresponding  to 6-7 September 200I  A.D, the  committee further discussed the exposure draft of the standard and  made amendments  that were deemed necessary in preparation of the submission to Shari'ah Board.
The revised exposure draft of the standard was presented to the Shari'ah
Board  in  its  8th  meeting  held  in  Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah from 28
Safar to 4 Rabi' I,  1423  A.H.,  corresponding  to 1116  May 2002  A.D. The Shari'ah  Board  made  further  amendments   to  the  exposure  draft and decided to defer its discussion in the public hearing until views crystallize



407





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit

on the  issue  of the  contract that is relied  upon  for documentary credit  in the context  of the deferment  of its two counter-values,  known  as Ta 'jil  al• Badalayn.

The  revised  exposure   draft  of the  standard   was also presented  to  the Shari'ah  Board  in its 9th meeting held in Makkah  Al-Mukrramah during the period  of 11-16 Ramadan  1423 A.H., corresponding to 16-21  November
2002 A.D. The Shari'ah  Board made  further  amendments to the exposure draft and decided  that it should  be distributed to specialists and interested parties  in order  to obtain  their  comments  in preparation  of its discussion in a public hearing.

A public hearing  in Bahrain  on 18  Dhul-Hajjah  1423  A.H.,  correspond• ing to  19  February  2003 A.D. The  public  hearing  was attended  by more than thirty  participants representing central  banks, institutions, accounting firms,  Shari'ah  scholars,  academics  and  others  interested in the field.  The members  of the Shari'ah Standards  Committees (1)  and  (2),  responded  to the written  comments that were sent prior to the public hearing  as well as to the oral comments  that were expressed  in the public hearing.

The Shari'ah  Standards  Committees (1)  and (2) held  a joint  meeting on
2 Muharram  1424  A.H.,  corresponding to 5 March  2003 A.D.,  to discuss the  comments  that  were  made  during  the  public  hearing   as well  as the observations received in writing. The two  committees made  amendments that were deemed  suitable.

The Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. (10) held in Al-Madinah Al• Munawwarah during  the period  of 2-7 Rabi' I,   1424  A.H.,  corresponding to  3-8 May 2003 A.D.,  discussed  the  amendments made  by the  Shari'ah Standards Committee, and incorporated the amendments deemed  suitable. The Shari'.ah  Board unanimously adopted  some of the items of the standard and some  items  were adopted  by the majority  vote of the  members  of the Shari'ah  Board,  as recorded  in  the minutes  of the meetings  of the Shari'ah Board.

The Shari'ah Standards Review Committee reviewed  the standard in its meeting  held  rn  Rabi' II,  1433  A.H., corresponding to March  2012  A.D., in the State of Qatar, and proposed after deliberation a set of amendments



408





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit

(additions,  deletions,  and   rephrasing)  as  deemed   necessary,   and  then submitted the  proposed  amendments to the  Shari'ah  Board  for  approval as it deemed  necessary.

In its meeting No.  (41)  held in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah, Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia during the period of27-29 Sha'ban  1436 A.H., corresponding  to
14-16 June 2015 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed the proposed amendments submitted  by the Shari'ah  Standards Review Committee.  After deliberation, the Shari'ah Board approved  necessary  amendments, and the  standard  was adopted in its  current  amended  version.











































409





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary Credit





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Permissibility  of Documentary  Credit
The permissibility of documentary  credit is  based on the principle that it  relies upon contracts  that are  valid according to the Shari'ah, such as Kafalah (personal guarantee),  Wakalah (agency contract) and Qard (loan).

Shari'ah Categorization  of Documentary  Credit
The basis for the permissibility of irrevocable documentary credit is a combination  of a contract  of guarantee and agency. 'Tb  these two the Qard (loan)  transaction  is to be added.  It derives  permissibility from  the contract  of mortgage  (Rahn)  as  well, because  it  secures payment.  The contract of guarantee  creates a liability for payment, while agency determines  the performance of acts relating  to oper• ations such as communication  of the credit notification  and initia• tion of operations  pertaining  to follow-up and examination  of doc• ument. 'The loan element comes into operation when the institution pays on behalf of the client  in case of documentary credit  that  is totally or partially uncovered.
■  The basis fer the permissibility of  a revocable  documentary credit is  that
it is  a form of agency contract that is  permitted by the Shari'ah.  When a third party's right  is attached to it, it becomes binding, and this occurs when  it  leads  to  acceptance or  payment.  A revocable  documentary credit cannot  be  classified  under  the  contract  of guarantee  for two reasons;  namely (I) it conflicts with the requirements of guarantee; and (II)  an option is not permissible in guarantee contracts.
+  The basis for  the permissibility of the undertaking  of the confirming bank and other similar undertakings  of the banks that participate  in

(2)  Resolution  No.  (419)  of  the Shar'ah  Board  of the Al Rajhi  Banking  Corporation  and
Investment  and Answer  No.  (71)  of the Shari'ah  advisor of Dallah Al Baraka
(3)  Ibn  Qudamah,  A! Sharh Al-Kabir",  [3:  59-60],  1951  A.D.



410





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary Credit

issuance or confirmation  of the credit is that it is an act of back up guar•
antee,  which is permissible in the Shari'ah."
The  basis of permissibility  of guarantee  in  irrevocable  credit  being qualified  from  the  perspective  of execution  with  the  condition  that documents  presented conform  to the conditions stipulated,  is the ruling of the  jurists  that  Kafalah (guarantee)   accepts qualification  through a stipulated condition.6
The  basis  for  the  ruling  that  documentary  credit  terminates   with
implementation or expiry is that the guarantee  for documentary credit is limited  in time by a period,  and this is the period  of validity of the credit. It is  permitted to place a time frame on guarantee."
■  The  basis for  the  permissibility  ct the  contract  relied  upon  for  doc•
umentary  credit, as well  as  its conditions,  is  that  it is  a sale  for which security is provided through  guarantee, and this is  compatible with the objectives of the contract.
Contract That  Precedes  the Opening of Credit
• The  basis for the permissibility ct making  opening  ct documentary credit a condition  in the sale contract preceding  documentary credit is that such a condition  is similar to a stipulation  to provide a specific guarantor   for  payment,  which  is  a valid condition  acknowledged  as an interest  for the contract. (
• The  basis  for  the  permissibility   of undertaking  international  sale contracts  and their  security through documentary credit is that upon examination, the international sale contracts that are secured through documentary  credit  pose  a difficulty:  Do they  involve  delay of the
two counter-values  that  is prohibited by the Shari'ah?

(4)  Ibid.,  [13:  25-26]  Ah' AI-Din   AI- Samarqandi, "Tuhfat AI-Fuqaha", [3: 407]
(5)  Ibn  Abidin,  "Radd AL-Muwhtar  'Ala  AL-Durr Al-Mukhtar",  [4:  265], Beirut:  Dar Ihya'
AI-Turath Al'Arabi, n.d.
(6)  Ibid. (P.  265).  Ibn Qudamah, "ANSharh Al-Kabir", [13:  25-26];  AI-Samarqandi,  "Thfat
Al-Fuqaha",  [3:  402, 404 and 405]; Muhammad Al-Hajjar,   "Fath Al-Allam  Bi-Sharl Murshid Al-Anam    Al-Figh  'Ala  Madhhab Al-Sadah Al-Shaf'iyyah",  [5:  43],  Beirut: Dar Ibn Ham,  1418  A.H.
(7)  See: Wizarat Al- Awqaf A!-Kuwaytiyyah, "Al-Maws~h AI- Fighiyyah, letter "Ra", "Bay"
"Bay'  Wa Shart",  Para (28)  AI- Samarqandi,  "Thfat  AI-Fuqaha",  [2:  70].  Mustafa Ahmad Al-Zarqa,  AI-Madkhal AL-Fiqhi Al-Amm,  1986,  (pp.  477-478);  Muhammad AL-Hajjar,  "Fath AI-Allam",  [5:  19]



411





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary Credit

The members of the Board differed on this into those who prohibit them due to the cause indicated, and those who permit them -being in a majority with those permitting them disagreeing on the following points:
a) That these contracts -prior to the ascertainment of the goods- do not involve delay in the two counter-values rather they amount to bilateral promises, which are agreements to sell and do not amount to sale itself.
b) That they merely amount to extension of the session of the contract (Majlis  al- 4qd),  with  respect  to the agreement,  up to  the time of ascertainment  of the goods.
c) That they do not amount to a delay in the mu counter-values, but they are permitted on the basis of general need.
d)That  they are,  ab initio,  an exchange of a debt for a debt and this is
permitted under the Shari'ah
e) That  the contract preceding  the opening  ct documentary credit amounts to a sale contingent upon the opening of credit.
f) That these contracts do not involve delay in counter-values, because that  is  attained  through  a stipulation  for  delay,  while there  is  no stipulation of delay in this case.

Commissions and Expenses in Documentary Credit
The  basis  for  the  impermissibility of  receiving  compensation  for guarantee for the aspect related to documentary credit is that a guarantee is preparatory to extending a loan, and this is not to be compensated. The four Fiqh schools are unanimous on the impermissibility of taking compensation for  guarantee.  This  rule is  endorsed  by a resolution of the International Islamic Fiqh Academy," a ruling of the Shari'ah Supervisory  Board  of the  Faysal  Islamic  Bank  of  Sudan,"  the Shari'ah  Board of Al Rajhi  Banking  Corporation for Investment9 and a resolution  of the Shari'ah  Fatwa and Supervisory Board of the Kuwait Finance House.

(8)  International  Islamic  Fiqh Academy  Resolution  Na.  12(12/2).
(9)  Fatwa  No.  (14)  of the Sharf'ah  Supervisory  Board  of  the Faisal  Islamic  Bank, Sudan. (10)  Resolution No. (297) af the Fatwas  af the Shari'ah Supervisory Board of Kuwait Finance
House.



412





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary Credit

The   basis   for   the   permissibility   of  receiving   compensation   for an agency-related  service  in documentary  credit,  whether  in a lump sum or as a percentage of a known amount, is that the amount is in lieu of services rendered by the institution, in its capacity as an agent of the client.  The majority of the Fuqaha upheld the permissibility  of charging wages for agency.(  The  Sharf'ah  Supervisory Board of Al Rajhi Banking Corporation  for  Investment has passed a resolution  permitting  receipt
ct payment including the services involved  in documentary  credit  with•
out referring to the aspect of guarantee.3
• The basis for the impermissibility  of charging commissions  in consid• eration for providing long or short term loans, discounting and trading (payment  of the  value)   in documents and  def zrred  payment  bills of exchange or for providing  facility, are the texts of the Qur 'an  and the Sunnah  laying down the prohibition  of Riba.3
Guarantees in Documentary Credit
■  The  basis  for  the  permissibility  ct seeking  guarantees  explained  in this  Standard  (item  3/4) is  that collateral  (Rahn)  may be money,  debt or tangible  asset insofar  as  they  might  be  lawfully owned  or created according  to the Shari'ah  and because the debt to be  secured  may be a current  or future obligation.

(1I)  Ala'  AL-Din AI-Mardawi,  "AL-Insaf,  [13: 577].
(12)  Resolution  No.   (419)  of the Shari'ah   Supervisory  Board  of AI  Rajhi   Banking
Corporation  for Investment.
(13)  In  its  Resolution  No.  (372),  the Shari'ah  Supervisory  Board  of AI Rajhi  Banking
Corporation for Investment  stipulated:  It is  prohibited in documentary credit to collect  from the client  any interest  at any stage  of  the credit"  (for discounting and trading in commercial  papers, see item 2/8 where the resolution provides the Shari'ah basis for this ruling).  As regards commission  for providing the facility, the facility is preparatory  to extending  a loan, and hence if commission is prohibited for giving the loan itself it would be obviously correct to prohibit commission for a mere  readiness to do so This conclusion has been adopted  in the Al Baraka 8 Forum in its Fatwa No. (13) and the response of the Shari'ah advisor to Dallah Abaraka Group No.  (I).
(14)  See:  AI-Samarqadi,   "Tuhfat  Al-Fuqaha",  [3:  53-54];  AI-Mardawi,  "AlHnsaf,  [13:
359];  Al-Hajjar,   "Fath A!-Allam",  [5:  44];  Ibn Qudamah, "AI-Mughn,  [6:  444445]; Abu Abdullah  Muhammad Ibn  Muhammad,  Mawahib  Al-Jalil  Sharh  Mukhtasar Khalil",  2'  edition.,  [5:  5],  Beirut:  Dar AI-Fikr,  1978  A.D;  See also Islamic  Fiqh Academy  Resolution  No.  (86)  3/9,  Jeddah;  Fatwa  No.  (5)  of Al Baraka's  5 Forum
and Resolutions No.  (19 and 283) of Al Rajhi Banking Corporation for Investment.



413





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit

The basis for  not allowing the Institution  to sell its share of  partnership, in goods purchased by the client,  for  a delayed payment  to the client is that this amounts to a sale-buy back arrangement  (Bay' al-' Inah), which is prohibited  by the Shari'ah.
• The basis for not allowing negotiability of  documents payable on sight including bills of  exchange for an amount lesser than their nominal value is  that this adopts the form  of  the sale  of  debt,  which is  prohibited.














































414





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit





Appendix (C)
Definitions


Credit Documents

These are the  documents relating to goods  detailed in the credit. The documents are divided into two  types:  basic and additional  documents. Basic  documents include: Shipping documents, commercial invoice, ma• rine insurance policy, certificate ct origin,  consulate invoice  and prom• issory note.  Additional  documents include:  Weights  certificate,  analysis certificate,  review and inspection certificate,  warehouse receipts,  delivery orders,  packing review/supervision   certificate,  test certificate,  medical certificate and non-infection  certificate.  Such certificates are requested to verify certain attributes and characteristics of the commodity and to make sure that it is free  of defects and infection. The certificates are required by the authorities of the importing or exporting country.

Bill of Lading

A bill  of   lading  is   the traditional source  of  shipping  documents.  It indicates  the party authorized  to receive  the goods,  whether  it  is  the original beneficiary,  a party  in whose  name the  bill is  backed   as a collateral arrangement or an agent assigned to receive the  goods.  A bill  of lading constitutes  the practical  execution of the shipping contract signed  between the  shipper  and the  marine carrier.  Shipping  is  the responsibility of  either the buyer or of the seller according  to the  type of International  Sale Contract (Commercial Terms)  adopted.  A bill of lading is  the only shipping document that  can be backed.

Examination of Documents

It is  the process of ensuring that the documents comply with the spec• ifications  indicated  in the letter of  credit.  The general  conditions  for the integrity of documents are detailed through the following four conditions:



415





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Cre dit

■  That the documents are submitted  during  the validity of the credit.
■  That they are complete in number.
■  That they are complimentary and  one document  does not contradict another  and that each contains the required  information  or each serves its function.
■  That they conform  to the conditions  of the letter  of credit.

In case any of these conditions  is missing, for any one of these documents, it  is obligatory  upon  the  bank  to  reject the  documents   as a whole, even those that are not defective.

At Sight Credit

It  is credit that  has to be paid promptly  at sight according  to the value cf the documents,  by the issuing  bank,  the confirming bank or the paying bank,  if the documents  conform  to the conditions  of the credit.

Deferred  Payment Credit

It is  an undertaking given by the issuing,  or confirming bank to pay at a future date,  being the date fixed in the credit,  the value ct the documents if they conform  to the conditions  of the credit.  It differs  from  acceptance
credit  insofar as the beneficiary  does not present  a promissory  note with the documents.

Acceptance  Credit
It is the acceptance  of the bill of exchange attached  to the documents  or is  signed on behalf of the bank; that is,  the bank accepts the obligation  of paying the nominal  value on the date of maturity.

Negotiation of Documents

It is  the payment  of the value of the documents,  or the purchase  of the bill of exchange attached to them; that is,  its discounting, whether  it is to be paid at sight  or after a known  specified period.

Acceptance  of Documents Under Reserve

It occurs when the bank chooses to accept the documents  at  its own risk despite their non-conformance  with the conditions of the credit, paying their value or accepting the bill of exchange attached to them,  on the condition that



416





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Cre dit

it reserves the  right of recourse to the beneficiary if the  issuing bank does not accept the discrepancies  in the documents.  The paying bank usually reserves this  right by way of obtaining  a letter  of guarantee,  covering the value of the documents, from the bank of  the beneficiary.

Marine Letter of Guarantee
It  is an  undertaking given  by  the  issuing  bank  to  place  the  original bill  of lading,  when  received,  at  the  disposal   of the  carrier   in  lieu  of receiving  back a letter from  him.  The carrier  in this case is relieved  from all responsibility that  may  arise  from  the  delivery  of the  goods  to  the importer,  who gives an undertaking to the issuing bank for the acceptance of the  documents regardless  of any discrepancies  in them.  This  type  of letter  is  usually  issued  upon  arrival  ct the  goods  when the documents are to follow or are delayed.

Correspondent Bank
It is  the bank  assigned  by the  issuing  bank  to notify  the beneficiary  of the  credit.  As a rule,  the  correspondent  bank  is  under   no  obligation  to pay the value  of the credit; its  role is  confined  to that  of an intermediary. Correspondent banks  are banks  with which  the institution  makes certain arrangements for accepting  or covering the value of the credits that it issues or confirms.

In case the beneficiary requests notification through  a non-correspondent bank,  the  issuing  bank  sends  its instructions  to  one  of its correspondent banks asking it to process the notification  through  the bank nominated by the beneficiary.

Confirmation of Credit
It is  the merging  of the liability of the confirming bank with the liability of the  issuing  bank  making  both  banks  liable for  fulfilling the conditions of payment  of credit, when  the beneficiary  presents  documents that  meet the  terms  of the  credit.  The  beneficiary   has the  right  to  claim  payment severally from either  bank or jointly  from both banks.
The Paying  Bank
It is  a correspondent  bank  of the  issuing bank  in  the  currency   of the credit  to whom  the issuing  bank entrusts  the payment  of the value of the



417





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit

credit on its behalf, but the paying bank is under no obligation for executing
this trust.

The Covering Bank
Covering banks are types of correspondent banks with which the  bank maintains  an account and  to  whom it delegates  the  authority  to  cover disbursement and negotiation payments upon the first presentation.

Transferable Credit
It is irrevocable credit by means of which  the  beneficiary (first benefi• ciary) requests the bank assigned,  or any other licensed  institution,  to make payment or to undertake to pay in the future or to accept or to negotiate so as  to make the credit  available,  in whole or in part,  to the beneficiary or beneficiaries.

Back to Back Credit

It is irrevocable credit issued for the same purpose as that of transferable credit whenever a credit is  not transf 2rable.

Revolving Credit

It is  credit that is  opened for a fixed value and duration,  except that its value is renewed automatically when it is executed or utilised so as to enable the beneficiary to present documents for a new operation within the value of  the credit, during the period of  its validity, and for the number of times fixed for the credit.

Advance Credit or Red Clause Credit

It is credit  bearing a paragraph written in red ink to invite  attention to its instructions.  In this credit, the authorised bank is assigned  to pay certain amount according to percentage of the value of the credit to the beneficiary in advance before  the  goods  are shipped  and before the documents  that necessitate payment are presented.

Credit Available for Negotiation
This  is credit by which the issuing bank grants to the correspondent bank the legal authority to buy bills of  exchange drawn on the basis of  documentary



418





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit

credit  upon  presentation   of bills of exchange   that  are payable  at sight  by the issuing bank or are payable in the future to the  issuer of documentary credit. Accordingly, the seller is able to receive the value of the credit (bills of exchange)  upon presentation  of required  complete documents  that obligate
payment  of the value of the credit.


















































419


























