Standard No.  (12)



Sharikah(Musharakah)

and Modern Corporations


(Revised Standard)












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        326

I.  Scope  of the Standard ..........sos.sos.so.so.so.ososoooooooooo.sos.a.....                            326
2.  Definitions, Classifications and Types of Sharikat al-'.Aqd..................        326
3.  First Category: Traditional Fiqh-Nominate  Partnerships...................        327
3/1  General rulings of Sharikah, especially Sharikat al-'Inan                   327

3/2 Partnership in creditworthiness or reputation..............................         337
3/3  Service partnerships (professional or vocational  partnerships
and partnerships in skilled trades)...............................................        337
4.  Second Category:  Modern Corporations..............................................        338
4/1  Stock company..................................................................................         338
4/2 Joint-liability company.....................................................................        342
4/3  Partnership  in commendum ........as...o»a.or.so.a.a.oo.a.a.a..a.....     343
4/4 Company limited by shares..............................................................        344
4/5  Allotment/particular (Muhassah) partnership..............................        345
5  Diminishing  Musharakah .......sos.moos«ooh.moos»moo»or+.                346
6.  Date of Issuance ci the Standard............................................................        348
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        349
Appendices
Appendix (a):   Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard.............        350
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard....................................         352
Appendix (c);   Definitions.............................................................................          363










323








IN  THE NAME OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the  worlds,  and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and  all his companions





Preface


The objective of this standard  is  to explain the basis and general rulings for Sharikat al-'Aqd, (contractual partnership) which is known today as Musharakah, including  the rulings for joint  partnership, reputation  (cred• itworthiness)  partnership, vocation  partnership,  diminishing partnership and modern  corporations. The explanation  of these partnerships includes definitions,  rulings  applicable  to  each partnership  and  the  Shari'ah  lim• itations  that  must  be taken  into  account  by Islamic  financial  Institutions (Institution/Institutions).0

























(1) The  word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



325





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard  covers all forms of traditional  Fiqh-nominate partnerships that  operate  on the  basis of Sharikat  al-Aqd  (contractual partnership), except  the  partnerships  that  are  explicitly  excluded  by this   standard as  indicated  below. The  standard   also  applies  to  all modern   forms  of partnerships including  diminishing Musharakah. The standard  does not cover ownership  partnership where  the parties jointly  own an asset.  It does not  include  rules for Sharikat  al-Mufawadah because  the practical application of this form of partnership is  rare and, if need be,  ref zrence should  be made to Fiqh books.  The standard  does not cover Mudarabah, because  this  form  ct partnership  has  a separate  standard.  In the  same vein,  it does  not  cover  sharecropping  partnerships,  such  as irrigation and agricultural  partnerships. The standard  also does not cover, as far as modern  partnerships are concerned, regulatory policies and procedures necessary  for operations  in the market.
2. Definition,  Classifications and Types of Sharikat al-'Aqd

2/1   Defi nition  of Sharikat al-'Aqd

Sharikat  al-Aqd  (contractual   partnership)  means  an agreement  be• tween two or more parties to combine their assets, labour or liabilities for the purpose  of making profits.
2/2  Classifications of Sharika t al-'Aqd

Sharikat  al-'Aqd is  classified into  two main categories: First  Category:  Traditional Fiqh-N ominate Partnerships. Second  Category:  Modern  Corporations.
2/2/1  The traditional Fiqh-nominate partnerships  are  as follows:

a) Sharikat al-' Inan (contractual partnership)



326





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah),  and Modern  Corporations

b)Sharikat  al-Wujuh  or Al-Dhimam, ie partnership of credit•
worthiness  or reputation  (liability partnership)

c) Sharikat  al-A'mal (vocational  partnerships and partnerships
for undertaking difficult  work or accepting  jobs)

2/2/2 Modern corporations  and their  well-known forms  are as fol•
lows:

a) Stock company

b) Joint-liability  company

c) Partnership  in commendum d)Company limited  by shares
e) Allotment  (Muhassah)  partnership

f) Diminishing  partnership  (this  partnership  has  originated from  Sharikat  al-' Inan)

3. First Category:  Traditional Fiqh-Nominate Partnerships

3/1  General rulings for Sharikah, especially Sharikat  al-Inan

Sharikat al-'Inan is a partnership  between two or more parties whereby each partner contributes  a specific  amount  ct money in a manner  that gives each one a right to deal in the assets of the partnership, on condition that  the profit  is  distributed  according  to the partnership   agreement and that  the losses are borne  in accordance  with the contribution  ct each partner  to the capital.

3/1/1  Conclusion  of a Sharikah  contract

3/1/1/1  A Sharikah  contract  can be  concluded   by agreement between  the  parties  concerned on  the basis of offer and acceptance.  The contract  of partnership should, if necessary,  be documented and registered  officially. The objectives of the partnership must be clearly spelt out in  the document ct partnership or in the articles of association  of the company.

3/1/1/2    It is permissible  for the Institution  to enter into a part• nership  contract  with  non-Muslims or  conventional banks to carry out  operations  acceptable  by Shari'ah



327





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

unless it has become evident that the funds  or items presented by these entities for the purpose of the part• nership are from non-permissible  sources.  In operating a partnership with non-Muslims or conventional banks, arrangements   must  be  made  to obtain  all necessary assurances  and  guarantees  that  rules  and  principles of the Sharf'ah  are observed  during  operations  of the partnership.  Among  such  guarantees  is   one  to  the effect that  the  operations  of the  company  be  either managed  or supervised  by an entity that observes the Sharf'ah  rules.

3/1/1/3   It  is permissible  for the Institutions to include  con• ventional banks as partners  in a syndicated financing which operates on the basis  of Shari'ah,  provided that the Institution secures the right to manage the partner• ship's  operations  and that  such operations  are subject to the Shari'ah supervision.  [see Shari'ah Standard No (24) on Syndicated  Financing]

3/1/1/4   It is permissible for the partners  to amend at any point of time the terms of a partnership  contract. They may make  changes  to  the  ratio  of profit-sharing,  taking into  account  that  any losses  are shared  according  to the share of each partner  in the partnership  capital.

3/1/2  The capital ofSharikah

3/1/2/1   In principle,  the  capital  of Sharikah  should  be  con• tributed   in  the  form  of monetary   assets  on  which one can  rely in order  to determine  the amount  of the capital and to recognise profit or loss.  Nevertheless,  it is permissible, with the agreement  of all partners, to provide  tangible  assets (commodities)  as  the  capital of Sharikah  after the monetary  values of these assets are determined and expressed in currency  in order to know the share  contributed by each partner.



328





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

3/1/2/2   If partners have contributed their  partnership cap• ital  in  different  currencies,  these  currencies  must be  translated  into  the  currency  of the  Sharikah  at current exchange  rates so as to determine the shares and liabilities  of each partner
3/1/2/3   The  share  of each  partner   in  the  capital  should  be determined,  whether   it  is   contributed  in  the  form of one lump sum or by more than  one payment  over time; i.e., when there is a need for additional funds to increase  the capital.
3/1/2/4   It is  not  permitted that  debts  (receivables)  alone  be used as a contribution  to the Sharikah capital. However, debts may form  part of the contribution  to the capital where they become  inseparable from other  assets that can  be presented  as  a contribution  to the capital  in Sharikah,  such  as when  a manufacturing  firm use its net assets as a contribution  to the capital.  [see Shari'ah Standard No.  (21)  on Financial Paper]

3/1/2/5   The  funds  of current  accounts,  although   they  are juristically  classified   as  loans  to  the  Institutions, can be presented as a contribution to the capital  in a Sharikah  either  with  the Institution  itself or with a third  party.

3/1/3  Managing  a Sharikah  venture

3/1/3/1    In principle, each partner  is entitled to act in the interest of the partnership  in the following transactions:  spot or def zrred  sales;  taking possession  or custody  of the partnership receivables; making payments  or deposits and providing  or receiving a mortgage on behalf of the partnership;  asking for  payment  of debts,  admission of liabilities,  taking  up  legal actions,  cancellation  of contracts,  rejecting defective goods,  renting the assets of the partnership,  processing  transfers  of rights  and



329





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corpo rations

debts;  requesting  credit  facilities  in  the interest  of partnership;  and  doing  what  is  customary   in the interest  of trading.  A partner   is  not  entitled  to  act against the interest  of the partnership   or to perform actions that will damage the partnership,  such as giving out  grants   or  loans,   unless  all the partners   have consented  to  such  an action.  However,  the  partner may give out  short-term  minor  loans  that  will not, according  to customary  practice,  affect the operation of partnership.

3/1/3/2   It is  permissible  for the  partners  to  agree  that  the management   of the partnership will be restricted  to certain partners  or to a single partner. In this case, the other  partners   are  bound  to  abide  by  their  consent not to act on behalf of the partnership.

3/1/3/3   It is permissible  for the partners  to appoint a manager other  than  one of the partners  and  pay him  a fixed remuneration that will be included  in the expenses  of the Sharikah.  It  is  also permissible  that  the partners set aside a portion  of the investment profit plus a fixed remuneration as a form of incentive for the manager. However, if the management  is  carried  out from the outset  for  a percentage   share  in  the  profit  earned, this action  classifies the manager  as a  Mudarib  and he is  only entitled  to a share  in the profit, if any, and deserves  no  further   remuneration  for  management
services.

3/1/3/4   It  is  not permitted,  in a Sharikah  contract,  to specify
a fixed remuneration for a partner  who contributes  in managing  the Sharikah  funds or provides  some  form of other  services,  such as accounting.  However,  it is permissible  to give him a greater share of profit than he would receive solely on the basis of his share in the partnership  capital.



330





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

3/1/3/5  I is permissible  that one of the partners  be appointed to provide services that are mentioned  in item 3/1/3/4 provided  that  the appointment  is  based  on an inde• pendent  contract  from  the Sharikah  contract  so that he may be dismissed as a manager at any point of time without  the need to amend or to terminate  the Shari• kah contract.  In this case, the appointed  partner  may earn a specific remuneration.

3/1/4  Guarantees  in a Sharikah  contract

3/1/4/1    All partners  in a Sharikah  contract maintain  the assets of the Sharikah on a trust basis. Therefore, no one is liable  except  in cases of misconduct,  negligence  or breach of contract.  It is  not permitted  to stipulate that a partner  in a Sharikah  contract guarantees  the capital of another  partner.

3/1/4/2   It is permissible  for a partner  in a Sharikah  contract to stipulate  that another  partner  provides  a personal guarantee  or a mortgage  to cover cases of misconduct, negligence  or breach  of contract.
3/1/4/3   A third  party  may provide  a guarantee  to make  up a loss of capital  of some  or all partners.   This  guar• antee   is   circumscribed  with   the   conditions  that (I)  the legal  capacity  and  financial  liability  of such a third  party  as a guarantor  are independent from the  Sharikah   contract,   (II)   the  guarantee   should neither  be provided  for consideration nor  linked  in
any manner  to the Sharikah  contract;  (Ill)  the third
party guarantor should  not own more than  a half of the  capital  in  the  entity  to be guaranteed,  and  (IV) the  guaranteed  entity  should   not  own  more  than
a half of  the capital  in the entity  that  undertakes to
provide  a guarantee.  In case of  a third  party's  under•
taking to guarantee,  the partner  benefiting  from such



331





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

an  undertaking  is not,  however,  entitled   either  to claim that  the Sharikah  contract  becomes  null  and void  or to  refuse  to  meet  his obligations  under  the contract  if the  guarantor  fails  to  meet  his  volun• tary  promise  to cover the  loss of his capital, on the grounds that he (the beneficiary)  entered into the Sharikah  contract   taking  into  account   the  state  of such  a third   party's  undertaking  to  guarantee   the loss  of his capital.

3/1/5  The outcome  ofSharikah  investments  (profit  and loss)

3/1/5/1   The Sharikah contract  should incorporate  a provision specifying the manner  of sharing profits between the parties.  The  allocation  of profits  must  be  made  in a manner  that  gives each partner  an undivided  per• centage of profit,  not a sum of money or a percentage of the capital.  [see  item  3/1/5/9]

3/1/5/2   It is  not permitted   to def er  the determination of the profit  percentages  due to each partner  until  the re• alisation  of  profit.  The  profit  percentage   for  each partner  must be determined at the conclusion of Sharikah  contract.  The parties  may bilaterally  agree to amend  the  percentages   of profit-sharing  on  the date of distribution.  Also,  a partner  may relinquish, on the date of distribution,  a part of the profit that is due to him in favour of another  party.
3/1/5/3   In principle,  the shares of profit may be in proportion to  the  percentage  of each  partner's  contribution  to the Sharikah  capital.  Nevertheless,  the partners  may agree  to  make  profit-sharing   not  proportionate  to their contributions to capital, provided the additional percentage of profit over the percentage of contribution to the capital is  not in favour of a sleeping partner.  If a partner  did  not  stipulate  a condition  that  he  be



332





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah),  and Modern  Corporations

a sleeping  partner,  then  he is entitled   to  stipulate an additional profit share over his percentage of contribution to the capital  even if he did not work.

3/1/5/4    It is  a requirement  that the proportions of losses borne by  partners   be  commensurate  with  the proportions of their contributions to the Sharikah capital.  It is  not permitted,  therefore,  to agree on holding  one partner or a group of partners  liable for the entire  loss or liable for a percentage of loss that does not match their share of ownership  in the partnership.  It is,  however,  valid that one partner  takes, without any prior condition, the responsibility  of bearing the loss at the time of the loss.

3/1/5/5   It  is  permissible  for  the  partners to  agree  on  the adoption of any method of allocation of profit, either permanent or variable, for example, by agreeing  that the percentages of profit shares in the first period  are one set of percentages and  in the second  period  are anothersetofpercentages,dependingonthedisparity of the two  periods  or the  magnitude of the  realised profit.   This   is   allowed   provided  that   using   such a method does not lead to the likelihood of a partner being precluded from  participation  in profit.
3/1/5/6   I is  not permitted  to start the allocation  of profit be• tween the partners  unless the operating costs, expenses and taxes are deducted  in calculating the profit and the capital of the Sharikah  is  maintained  intact.
3/1/5/7    I is not permitted  that the conditions or modes of profit allocation in a Sharikah contract  include any clause or condition that  may result in the probable  violation  of the  principle  of sharing  profit.  For example,  if a pre• determined amount  of profit or a specific percentage of  capital  is   assigned   to  one  of the  partners,   this assignment  will be rendered  void.  If the assignment



333





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

is  amended  before profit comes forth, profit shall be divided  in accordance  with what partners  agreed  on as to amendment.  Otherwise,  profit shall be  divided based on each partner's  respective share in capital.

3/1/5/8   Taking into  account  the  provisions  of item  3/1/5/3, it  is  permissible  to agree that  if the profit  realised is above a certain  ceiling,  the  profit  in excess of such a ceiling belongs to a particular  partner. The parties may also agree that if the profit is not over the ceiling or   is  below  the  ceiling,  the  distribution   will be  in accordance  with their agreement.

3/1/5/9   The profit  may be finally distributed   on the basis  cf the proceeds  of selling all the existing assets,  known as actual  valuation,  or  on  the  basis of constructive valuation ofassets which means valuation of the assets cf the Sharikah  at fair value. The receivables must be valued at the cash value that is expected to be realised, i.e. after deduction  cf an allowance for doubtful  debts. In  valuing  receivables,  it  is   not  permitted   to  take account  of the time value of money  (interest)  or the notion  of discount  on the basis of current  value, i.e. a discount  of the amount  of the debt as consideration for   earlier   payment,   and   cash  amounts   shall   be
recognized  as is.

3/1/5/10 I is  not  permitted  that  the  final  allocation  of profit take place based on expected profit, i.e. it is  necessary that  the  allocation  cf profit  take  place  on the  basis of actual profit earned through  actual or constructive valuation  of the sold assets.

3/1/5/11 I is  permissible to allocate some funds to any cf the partners  on account, i.e. before actual or constructive valuation, on condition  that the final actual settlement will take place at a later  stage.  In this  case,  the parties



334





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corpo rations

should  undertake to  reimburse  to the  Sharikah  any amount   that  they  have  received  in  excess  of their share of profit after actual or constructive  valuation.

3/1/5/12 If the  subject  matter  of Sharikah  is   assets  acquired for leasing that bring in income or the subject matter is services  that  bring  in  revenue,  then  the  amount distributed   to  the  partners   annually  is  on  account, and it is  subject to settlement  and  reimbursement at the end of the Sharikah.

3/1/5/13 It is  permissible,  based on the articles  of association or  a decision  of the  partners,  not  to  distribute   the profits  of the  company.  It is  also permissible  to  set aside periodically  a certain ratio of profit as a solvency reserve  or  as a reserve  for meeting  losses  of capital (investment  risk reserve)  or  as a profit  equalisation reserve.

3/1/5/14 It is permissible  to agree on setting aside a proportion
of profit for  non-partners as a charitable  donation.

3/1/6  Maturity of Sharikah

3/1/6/1   Each  partner   is  entitled  to  terminate   the  Sharikah (i.e.  to withdraw  from  the  partnership)  after  giving his partner/s due notice  to this effct,  in which  case he shall be entitled to his share in the partnership, and this withdrawal would not necessitate the termination of the  partnership  of the  remaining   partners.  It is permissible  for the partners  to  enter  into  a binding promise  for  the  continuity   of the  partnership  for a period  of time. In this case, it is  permissible  for the parties  to agree to terminate   the partnership before such a fixed period. In all these cases, the obligations and  actions  that  took  place before termination  will remain  unaffiected and they will continue  to exist.



335





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corpo rations

3/1/6/2    It is  permissible for a partner to issue a binding promise to buy, either within the period of operation or at  the time of liquidation,  all the assets of the Sharikah  as per their market value or as per agreement at the date of buying.  It is  not permissible, however,  to promise to buy the assets of the Sharikah  on the basis  of face value.

3/1/6/3   A Sharikah  venture comes to an end at the expiry date or before the expiry date if the partners  agree to  terminate  it prematurely, or, in the case of part• nership in a particular business, by actual liquidation cf the assets that constitute the subject matter cf the partnership. The termination  of a Sharikah can take place on the basis of constructive liquidation. In this case,  the Sharikah  will be regarded as if it  has been ended and the parties have commenced  a new part• nership whereby the assets that were not sold through actual liquidation,  but have been valued on the basis of constructive liquidation, will be considered as the capital  of the new partnership.  If the liquidation  is based on the expiry date, then all the existing assets shall be sold  according to current  market values and the proceeds will be used as follows:
a)  Payment of liquidation expenses.

b)  Payment ct financial liabilities from the net assets
of the partnership.

c)  Distribution  of the  remaining  assets among  the partners  in accordance  with their  percentage  of contribution  to the capital. If the assets fill short and the partners  do not recover all of their contri• buted capital,  the distribution shall take place on a pro rata basis to the shares of capital.



336





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

3/2  Partnership in creditworthiness or reputation  (liability partnership)

3/2/1  A partnership  in creditworthiness  (partnership  of liability)  is a bilateral agreement  between  two or more parties  to conclude a partnership to buy assets on credit on the basis of their reputation for  the purpose  of making  profit,  whereby  they  undertake to fulfil their obligations  according  to the percentages  determined by  the  parties.  In addition,  the  parties  should  determine  for each  partner the percentage of profit  sharing and of liability sharing, which latter may, by agreement,  differ, downwards or upwards,  from the percentage of profit sharing.

3/2/2 The  partnership  in  creditworthiness  has no  monetary   cap• ital.  This  is  because  the  subject  matter  of the  partnership  is an obligation or a liability that is contingent on creditworthiness (outstanding  reputation).  This is  the obligation  of the partners
to pay the amount  of debts created through  purchases on credit, which  form the liability of the partners.  Therefore, the parties should agree on the ratio of  liability for which  each partner  is responsible when paying such debts.

3/2/3  The  profit  shall  be  distributed  according to  the  agreement.
However,  the  loss  will be  borne  by  each  partner according to  the  ratio  that   each  partner  had  undertaken  to  bear  in proportion to overall assets that  are purchased on credit.  It is not  permitted that  the  contract of partnership  incorporates a provision   that  specifies  a  lump  sum  from   the  profit  for a particular partner.

3/3  Service partnerships (professional or vocational partnerships  and partnerships in skilled  trades)

3/3/1  A service  partnership  is  an agreement   between  two  or more parties  to provide  services pertaining to a profession, vocation or  skilled  trade  or  to  render   some  services  or  professional advice or to manufacture goods,  and to share profit according to an agreed upon  ratio.



337





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah),  and Modern Corporations

3/3/2 The service partnership  has no monetary  capital. This is because the  subject  matter   of the  partnership   is   rendering   services. There  is  no  Shari'ah  implication  regarding  any disproportion in the services  the partners  or their  representatives  may have rendered.  The partners   may also distribute  different  types  of services among themselves and may assign  some or al] partners a set of services or a particular  service in a way that will achieve the integration  and purpose  of the overal1 service to be rendered.
3/3/3  The  profit  shall be  distributed   among  the partners   according to  the  agreed  ratio,  but  the  contract  should  not  specify  that a lump  sum be paid from the profit to a particu1ar partner.

3/3/4  If the  service  partnership  requires  capital  goods  (e.g, equip• ment  or tools),  then  it is  permissible  for each party to provide the necessary goods that his services require, in which case each partner owns the goods he has provided. The partners  may con• tribute funds to acquire the goods on the basis of a partnership in ownership.  It is  also permissible  for  a party to a Sharikah contract  to provide  the capital goods required  by the partner•
ship in consideration  for  fees  that  will be charged  against  the
Sharilcah  operation  as expenses.

4. Second Category: Modem Corporations

4/1   Stock company

4/1/1  Definition  of a stock company

4/1/1/1    A stock  company  is a company  of which  the capital is  partitioned into equal  units  of tradable  shares  and each shareholder's (co-owner's)  liability  is  limited  to his share in the capital. It is  a form of fi nancing part• nership.  The  rules  of Sharikat  al-'Inan apply to this company  except en the issue of  the limited liability of
the shareholders and the fact that this type of compa•
ny cannot  be unilaterally terminated  by one party or a minority of its shareholders.  [see  items 4/1/2/1  and
4/1/2/9]



338





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah (Musharakah),  and Modern Corporations

4/1/1/2    The stock company has a juristic personality through its incorporation  by law in such a way that it cannot avoid its  obligations  to people  dealing with  it.  This separates   the   liability  of  the   company   from   the liability of its  shareholders  (the  co-owners)  and also establishes for  it a separate legal  capacity  as required for  necessary  legal arrangements,  irrespective of the legal capacity of the shareholders. By definition, a stock company is entitled to initiate legal  claims through  its representative.  It is  subject to the jurisdiction  of the
place of its  incorporation.

4/1/2  Sharf'ah  Rulings relating to a stock  company

4/1/2/1   The  contract  forming  a stock  company  is  binding during   the  duration  designated  by the  artides  of association  for the continuity  of the company on the basis of the undertaking of the parties not to dissolve the company unless the majority of the partners  have consented  to do so.  Therefore,  no one is  entitled  to
dissolve  (to  terminate)   the  company  in  respect  to his shares.  However, a shareho]der is  entitled  to sell his shares or to relinquish  title to them  in favour of another  person.
4/1/2/2    It is  permissible  for the issuer  of shares to add  a certain percentage  to the  actual  value of the  shares  on  the subscription date in order to recover issuing expenses, provided that such percentage is appropriately estimated to reflect the actual expenses incurred.

4/1/2/3    It is permissible to issue new shares in order to increase the capital provided  the new shares are issued  at the fair  value of the  old  shares.  This  should  be  done  in accordance with the opinion of experts in valuation of the company's assets.  In other words,  the new issues can be issued  at a premium  or at a discount  to their nominal value,  or issued at a market value.



339





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corpo rations

4/1/2/4    It is permissible  that a shareholder underwrite  an issue of shares without any consideration. In such a case, there is an agreement between a person and the company on the date of incorporation  of the company, or of a share issue, to the effect that such a person is undertaking  to buy all or part of the shares issued.  In other words, it means  an undertaking  to subscribe  all the remaining shares  that  are not  subscribed  at its nominal  value. However, it is  permissible  for a shareholder  to ask for consideration  for services provided other than the underwriting, such as conducting feasibility studies or marketing  the shares.

4/1/2/5   It  is permissible  that a part  of payment  for subscrip• tion of shares be made  in an instalment  and that the other  instalments  be def erred.  In this case,  the paid instalment  is  a contribution  to  the  Sharikah   capi• tal,  and  the deferral  of some instalments  constitutes an undertaking to increase  his share of capital in the company  subsequently.  This  is permissible  provid• ed the  instalments   cover all the  shares  and  that the company's  liability  is  confined   to  the  value  of the subscribed  shares.
4/1/2/6   It is  not permitted   to purchase  shares using interest• based loans, provided  by either a broker or any other person,  in consideration  for mortgaging  the shares as a security  for payment.

4/1/2/7    I is  not permitted  for someone  to sell  shares  that he does  not  own  and  the  promise  of a broker  to lend the shares to him at the date of delivery does not constitute ownership  or possession of the shares. This is  not allowed especially if the broker  stipulates  that
the  seller  must  pay the price of the  shares  so  that he
can  deposit  it  and  earn  interest  in  return   for  such a loan.



340





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

4/1/2/8   In the legitimate public  interest,  it is  permissible   for the  relevant  authorities to organise  trading  in shares in such a way that  trading  will not take place except through  specific  licensed  stockbrokers.

4/1/2/9    It is  permissible  to restrict the liability of a company to its paid up capital if this is made public, in order to make the customers  of the company  aware of the  financial position  of the  company  without  any  uncertainty  or lack of transparency.

4/1/2/10 It is  permissible  to sell shares in the company  subject to rules  and  regulations  of the  company  that  do not conflict  with  Sharr'ah,  such  as pre-emptive   rights  of the existing shareholders  to purchase  the shares.
4/1/2/11 It  is  permissible  to  mortgage the  company's  shares.
However,  this is  subject  to the rules  and  regulations of the company  vis-~-vis the right of the shareholders to  mortgage   their   ownership  rights   to  undivided shares  in the company.
4/1/2/12It  is  permissible  to  issue  shares  "to  the  order   of"
(nominative  shares).

4/1/2/13It is  permissible to  issue "bearer  shares".  This  is  ex• ecuted  by handing over  to the  investor  a certificate that  represents a right  to shares  in the company  and receiving  their  value  in cash  or acquiring a counter deed  recognising  a debt  against  the  shareholder.  In this  case,  the  common  ownership  of shares  repre• sented  by the certificate is vested in the holder  cf the certificate of shares at any time.
4/1/2/ 14 It is not permitted to issue preference shares, i.e. shares that  have  special  financial  characteristics  that  give them a priori tyatthedateofliquidation cfthe company or at the date of distribution  of profit.  However,  it  is



341





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah),  and Modern  Corporations

permissible to grant certain shares, in addition to being entitled to rights attached to common  shares, certain procedural  and  administrative  privileges,   such  as a right of vote.

4/1/2/15It is not permitted to issue Tamatt' (enjoyment) shares:  shares that entitles the holder  a participation in  the  net  profit,  but  not  to  vote  and  which  are gradually   redeemed   before  the  termination  of the company  through  distribution of profits.

4/2  Joint-liability company

4/2/1  Definition  of Joint-liability  Company

4/2/1/1    A joint-liability company is a form cf personal partner• ship. It is a necessary requirement that this partnership is  publicly declared as a registered company assigned a unique  title (trademark).

4/2/1/2    A joint-liability company has a juristic  personality and independent  financial liability unrelated to the liability of the partners.  Nevertheless,  all the partners  are per• sonally responsible for the obligations and liabilities of the company if the existing assets cannot meet the lia• bilities of the company.

4/2/1/3   In addition  to  maintaining   documents   of the joint• liability company, the partners  are also obliged to maintain commercial  documents  relating to external trade  activities.

4/2/2  Shart'ah  Rulings relating to Joint-liability Companies

4/2/2/1   A creditor  of a joint-liability company  is  entitled  to demand   fulfi lment of all or part  of his  rights  from any of the partners in any way the creditor  deems fit. Therefore,  the creditor  is  not obliged  to claim  such
fulfilment  from the company  first.



342





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

4/2/2/2   The contract of a joint-liability partnership  is not bind• ing;  hence,  a partner  is  entitled to withdraw  from the partnership  on the following conditions:
a)   If the partners did not set a duration for the company..
If they agreed on a duration,  then such duration must
be observed.

b)  The partner  should notify the other partners  of the intention  to withdraw.
c)   If the  unilateral  withdrawal  from  the  partnership would not cause damage to other partners.
4/2/2/3   It is not permissible  for the partner  to bring in a sub• stitute for himself without  the agreement  cf the other partners.

4/3  Partnership in commendum

4/3/1  Defi nition  of partnership  in commendum

4/3/1/1   Partnership in commendum is  a form  of financing partnership. This is because the personality  of the op• erating  partner  is important for the sleeping partner and because there is  a difference  in terms  of determi• nation  of the ownership  of the partners,  whereby the ownership   is   calculated  based  on  disproportionate lots  and not on the basis of proportionate shares  that are equal in number.

4/3/1/2   This form of company. consists of managing  partners and  sleeping  partners.  The  managing   partners  in this partnership are jointly  liable for  the  obligations of the  company.  from  their  personal  wealth  on  the basis of joint-liability.  The  liability  of each sleeping partner  is  limited  to the number  of lots  he owns and
his liability does not extend  to his personal  assets,  It
is permissible  to limit the liability of some investors



343





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

without  any consideration  for limiting  their  liability, in which  case the company  consists of joint-liability partners and partners with limited  liability.  [ see item
4/1/2/9]

4/3/1/3   It  is  not  permissible  for  the  sleeping   partners  to interfere in the operations of the company.  The law does  not even allow that  their  names  be mentioned on the date of the registration of the company.  Only the  funds  collected from  the sleeping  partners are mentioned.

4/3/1/4   The  management of the  company  may be delegated either to one of the joint  liability partners  or to a third party. The sleeping partners  are not entitled to manage the company.

4/3/2  Shari'ah  Rulings relating to the partnership in commendum

4/3/2/1   Profit  must  be distributed  according  to  the  ratio  of lots or agreement.  Losses are borne  by managing  and sleeping shareholders partners, according  to the ratio of their  shares in the capital

4/3/2/2   It is  not  permissible to stipulate  that  a sleeping  part• ner  has  a right  to an amount of profit  according to a particular percentage of the capital or a lump  sum. [see  item  3/1/5/8]

4/4 Company limited  by shares

4/4/1  Defi nition  of a company  limited  by shares

The company limited by shares is a form of personal partnership. The subscription  in this  company  is  in accordance  with equal numbers  of shares  and  it comprises  of managing  partners  and
sleeping partners.

4/4/2  Sharf'ah  Rulings relating to the company  limited  by shares

4/4/2/1   The managing partners in this company are liable for
the obligations  of the  company from  their  personal



344





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (12):  Sharikah (Musharakah),  and Modern Corporations

assets on the basis of joint  liability.  They  are in the position  of a person  who  works  as a Mudarib  and simultaneously  participates  in a partnership. The sleeping  partners' liability  is  limited  to the number of  the shares   each  partner    owns   and   does   not extend  to his own assets. In this case, the liability of sleeping  partners is  equivalent  to that of the capital providers  in a Mudarabah  contract.  It is  permissible to  limit  the  liability  of some  investors  without  any consideration  for  limiting   their  liability,  in  which case the company  consists  of joint  liability partners and partners with limited liability.  [see  item  4/1/2/9]

4/4/2/2   It is  not permissible for the sleeping partners  to inter• fare  in the operations  of the company.  'The  law  does not even allow that their names are mentioned  on the date of the registration of the company.  Only the funds collected from the sleeping partners  are mentioned.
4/4/2/3   The management  of the company  may be delegated either to one of the managing  partners  or to a third party. The sleeping partners are not entitled to manage the company.
4/4/2/4   Profit  must be distributed according to the ratio of par• ticipation or agreement. Losses are borne by the man• aging shareholding partners and sleeping shareholding partners  according to their shares in the capital.  And any excess losses shall be borne by managing partners.

4/4/2/5   It is not permissible  to stipulate that a sleeping part• ner  has a right  to an amount of profit  according  to a particular  percentage  of the capital or a lump  sum.
4/5 Allotment/particular  (Muhassah) partnership

4/5/1  Definition  of allotment  partnership

4/5/1/1  The definition of Sharikat  al-'Inan  is  applicable  to an al•
lotment partnership [see item  3/1].  This type of partner•



345





Sharl'ah  Standard  No. (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah),  and Modern  Corporations

ship belongs to the personal (private)  form of company. The reason for this is  that the partners take into account before concluding a partnership  each ones financial strength  and ability to meet financial obligations  from his personal assets.

4/5/1/2   Sharikat   al-Muhassah  has  no  juristic   personality because  people  other  than  the partners do not know about  it. This partnership does not have any separate financial  liability  as an entity.

4/5/2  Shari'ah  rulings  relating to Muhassah  Company

4/5/2/1  The rulings  for and basis of a Muhassah  company.  do not  differ from  those  for an 'Inan  partnership.  [see item 3/1]

4/5/2/2   The liability of partners  is personal  and,  as such,  they are liable for the liabilities of the company. from their personal  assets.  The rules for and classification of an allotment partnership do not differ from  'Inan  part• nership.
4/5/2/3   The contract of a Muhassah partnership is not binding.
However,  if the  parties  agree to  make  it binding  for a particular  period  of time,  then  they shall be bound by such an agreement.  [see 4/3/2/2]

4/5/2/4   A  partner  in  Sharikat   al-Muhassah  is   entitled   to terminate his partnership  on  condition that  (I) he notifies  other  partners of his intention  to withdraw and  (II) the  unilateral withdrawal  from  partnership would  not cause damage  to other  partners or clients ct the  company.  The  partnership can be liquidated by  way  of actual  or constructive  liquidation  of the company's assets.
5. Diminishing  Musharakah

5/1   Diminishing  Musharakah  is  a form  of partnership  in  which  one of
the  partners promises  to buy.  the equity  share  ct the other  partner



346





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

gradually until the title to the equity  is completely transferred  to him. It is  necessary that this buying and selling should not be  stipulated  in the partnership contract.  In other words,  the buying partner is allowed to give only a promise  to buy. This promise  should  be independent of  the  partnership   contract.  In  addition,  the buying  and  selling agreement  must  be  independent   of the  partnership   contract.  It is not permitted  that  one contract  be  entered  into  as a condition  for concluding the other.

5/2 The general rules for partnerships  must be applied to a diminishing partnership,  especially the rules for Sharikat  al-'Inan.  Therefore,  it  is not permitted  that the contract  of diminishing  partnership  include any clause that gives  any of the parties a right to withdraw  his share in the capital.

5/3 It is not permitted  to stipulate that one partner should bear all the cost ct insurance  or maintenance on the ground  that  he will eventually own the subject matter of the partnership.

5/4  Each partner  should contribute  part of the capital.  The contribution may be in the form  of cash  or tangible assets that can be translated into a monetary value, for example, a land for building or equipment required  for the operation  of partnership.  The loss,  if any. shall   be borne periodically by the parties in accordance with the participation ratio of each partner  as the equity stake of one partner  decreases and the stake of the other partner  increases.

5/5 The ratio  of  profit or income  of the partnership  that  each partner (the Institution and customer) is entitled to should be clearly determined.  However,  it  is  permissible  for the partners  to agree on a ratio of profit sharing that is disproportionate to the ratio of equity ownership. It is  also permissible for the partners  either  to maintain the ratio of profit already: determined even ifthe ratio of equity shares has changed, or to agree on amending  the ratio of profit sharing due to the change  in the ratio  of equity shares.  In doing so,  they: must ensure  that the principle  of allocation of losses  in  accordance  with the ratio of equity  share of ownership  is  maintained.



347





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah   (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corpo rations

5/6  It is not permitted to stipulate  that one partner  has a right to receive a lump  sum out of the profits.  [see  item 3/1/5/8]

5/7  It is permissible for one of the partners  to give a binding promise that entitles the other  partner  to acquire,  on  the basis of a sale contract, his  equity  share  gradually,  according  to the market  value or a price agreed  at the  time  of acquisition.  However,  it  is   not  permitted   to stipulate  that  the equity  share  be acquired  at their  original  or face value,  as this would  constitute  a guarantee  of the value of the equity shares of one partner  (the Institution)  by the other  partner,  which is
prohibited  by Shari'ah.

5/8 The  partners  may arrange  for  the acquisition  of the equity share of the Institution  in a manner  that serves the interests  of both  parties. This  includes,  for  example,  a promise  by the  Institution's  client  to set  aside a portion  ct the profit  or the return  he may earn  from the partnership for the acquisition  of a percentage of the equity of the Institution.   The  subject  matter  of the  partnership  may be  divided into  shares,   in  which  case  the  Institution's   partner   can  purchase a particular   number   ct these  shares  at certain  intervals  until  the
partner   becomes  the  owner  af the  entire  shares  and  consequently becomes the sole owner of the subject  matter of  the partnership.

5/9  It  is permissible  for either of  the partners  to rent or to lease  the share of the other partner  for a specified amount and for whatever duration, in which case each partner  will remain  responsible for the periodical maintenance  of his share on a timely basis.

6.  Date of Issuance  of the Standard

This  Standard was issued  on 4 Rabi' L  1423 A.H., corresponding  to 16  May
2002A.D.













348





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations





Adoption of the Standard


The Sharf'ah Standard on Sharikah (Musharakah) and Modern Corporations was adopted  by the Shari'ah  Board in its  meeting  Na (8) held  in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah on 28 Safar -4 Rabi' I,  1423 A.H., corresponding to 11-16 May
2002A.D.











































349





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (12):  Sharikah (Musharakah),  and Modern Corporations





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (5) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 8-12 Ramadan
1421  A.H.,  Corresponding to 4-8 December  2000 A.D., the Shari'ah  Board decided  to  give  priority   to  the  preparation   of  a  Sharf'ah  Standard   on Sharikah  (Musharakah)  and Modern  Corporations.

On Saturday  15  Dhul-Hajjah   1421   A.H.,  corresponding  to  10  March
200  I  A.D, the  Fatwa  and  Arbitration  Committee   recommended  to  the Shari'ah   Board   the  commissioning  of  a  Shari'ah   consultant   to  prepare a juristic study and an exposure  draft  on the  Shari'ah  Rules for Sharikah (Musharakah)  and Modern  Corporations.

In  its  meeting  held  on  18  Muharram   1422  A.H.,  corresponding  to 12
April  2001  A.D.,  the  Fatwa  and  Arbitration   Committee   discussed   the exposure draft of the Sharf'ah Rules for Sharikah  (Musharakah)  and Modern Corporations  and asked the consultant  to make amendments in light of  the comments  made by  the members.  The Committee  also held a meeting  en
20 Jumada II 1422 A.H., corresponding to 8 September 2001 A.D.  and made some amendments  in light  of the comments  made by the members.

The revised  exposure draft of the Standard was presented to the Shari'ah
Board in its meeting No.  (7) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 9-13 Ramadan
1422 A.H., corresponding  to 24-28 November 2001  A.D.  The Sharf'ah  Board made further amendments to the exposure draft of the standard and decided that it should be distributed  to specialists  and interested parties in order to obtain their comments and discuss them in a public hearing.

A public hearing was held in Bahrain on 29-20 Dhul-Hajjah  1422 A.H., corresponding to 2-3 February  2002 A.D.  The public hearing was attended by  more  than  thirty  participants   representing  central  banks,  institutions,



350





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah),  and Modern  Corporations

accounting firms  Shari'ah  scholars,  academics and others  who are interested in this field. Some of the members  of the Shari'ah Board responded  to the written  comments  that  were sent prior  to the public hearing as well as to the oral comments  that were expressed  in the public hearing.

The Shari'ah Standards  Committee  in its meeting held on 21-22 Dhul• Hajjah 1422  A.H.,  corresponding to 6-7 March 2002 A.D., in the Kingdom of Bahrain  discuss  the  comments   made  about  the  exposure  draft.  The Committee  made  the necessary  amendments,  which  it  deemed  necessary in light of both  the discussions  that took place in the public hearing,  and the written  comments  that were received.

The  Sharl'ah  Board  in its  meeting  No.  (8)  held  on  28 Safar  - 4 Rabi' I,   1423  A.H.,  corresponding to  11-16 May 2002 A.D,, in Al-Madinah   Al Munawwarah  discussed  the amendments made  by the Shari'ah  Standards Committee,   and   made   the necessary   amendments,   which   it   deemed
necessary. Some paragraphs  of the standard were adopted by the unanimous vote of the members  of the Shari'ah Board,  while the other paragraphs  were adopted  by the majority  vote of the members,  as recorded  in the minutes of the Shari'ah  Board.

The Shari'ah Standards Review Committee  reviewed the standard in its meeting  held in Rabi' II 1433  A.H.,  corresponding to March 2012  A.D.  in the  State  of Qatar,  and proposed   after deliberation  a set of amendments (additions,  deletions,  and  rephrasing)   as  deemed   necessary,  and  then submitted  the proposed  amendments to the Shari'ah  Board  for approval as it  deemed  necessary,

In its  meeting No.  ( 41)  held in Al-Madinah  Al Munawwarah,  Kingdom
of Saudi   Arabia  on  27-29  Sha'ban   1436  A.H.,  corresponding  to  14-16
June 2015  A.D.,  the  Shari'ah  Board  discussed  the proposed  amendments submitted  by the Shari'ah  Standards Review Committee.  After deliberation,
the Shari'ah Board approved  necessary amendments, and the standard was adopted  in its current  amended  version.







351





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Permissibility  of Partnership

The  Fuqaha  have classified  partnerships into  four  categories,  namely Sharikat   al-'Inan  (contractual  partnership),  Sharikat   al-Abdan  (skilled trade   partnership),  Sharikat   al-Mufawadah  (agency-like  partnership) and  Sharikat al-Wujuh  (creditworthiness er reputation partnership). The most  important cf all is Sharikat  al- 'Inan  (contractual partnership). The permissibility of this  form  of partnership is  established by the  Qur 'an, the Sunn ah and practical consensus of the Fuqaha.
The permissibility cf Sharikah  is supported by the Saying cf Allah, the Almighty:  {"...And,  verily,  many partners  oppress  one another,  except those who believe and do righteous good deeds,  and they are few..."•

Among  the Sunnah provisions that  support  the permissibility of part• nership  is  the case of AI-Sa'ib  Ibn Abu Al-Sa'ib  Al-Makhzumi  who  was a partner of the Prophet  (peace be  upon  him)  in business  at the beginning of Islam.  On  the  day when  the  Prophet  (peace  be upon  him)  conquered
Mecca,  he met Al-Sa'ib,  then  he (peace  be  upon  him)  said:  "Welcome  my
brother and  my partner.  He jokes  not (i.e.  he  is serious   in  business)  and  do
not argue (unnecessarily),"3

Moreover,  partnership  is  one  of the  main  transactions in all societies since  the advent  cf Islam.  This constitutes,  therefore,  a practical  consensus for the permissibility and validity of partnerships.

The partnerships for which  the jurists  have clarified  their  rules  are the origins  of the modern  corporations,  such  as joint-stock companies  whose

(2)  [Sad:  24]
(3)  The  Hadith  had  been related by Al-Hakim  who deemed  it  authentic   [2:  61].  Al
Dhahabi agreed with A!-Hakim.



352





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah),  and Modern  Corporations

financial  standing  and obligations  are related to the volume  of the shares of the  company  and  on  its  juristic  personality,  not  on the  personality  of the  shareholders.  Therefore,  the  general  rules  for  various  partnerships in  Sharf'ah  will govern   modern   forms   of corporations.  However,  the procedural   systems  relating  to  representation  of partnership   companies and bureaucratic,  administrative   and accounting  procedures  are required by Maslahah  (consideration  of the public good or common  need), which is an acceptable source for  validating  human  actions provided  it is  employed in line with the principles  of Shari'ah.

The general basis  of Sharikah  is  agency (W:akalah)  because each partner is  acting as a principal  partner,  on one hand,  and acting in the  interest  of the partnership,  on the other hand,  as an agent for  the remaining  partners.
Unlike other partnerships,  Sharikat al-Mufawadah combines rules of agency
and guarantee simultaneously.

Conclusion of Sharikah Contract
■ It is  permitted  to conclude  a partnership  contract  with  non-Muslims or conventional banks  for carrying  out permissible  operations  in asso• ciation  with necessary  guarantees  that they will observe Shari'ah pre• cepts  and  principles.  The Sharl'ah basis for this is  the Hadith  stating: "The Messenger  of Allah  has prohibited  concluding partnership  with Jews and  Christians  unless the selling and  buying  is in  the  hands   of the Muslim" The cause of the prohibition  is  the fear of being involved in interest-based   transactions   or in  concluding  impermissible  contracts and this fear is  absent when there are guarantees  to observe and apply
Sharf'ah  rulings.AI Baraka Forum has issued  a resolution  in support of partnership between Islamic  banks and conventional  banks."°
The basis for the permissibility  of an agreement  on amending the terms
of partnership and the profit sharing  ratio is  that this action  does not lead  to  a  possibility  of precluding  a partner   from  getting  a share  of profit."

(4)  Musannaf lbn Abu Shaybah" [6:  9].
(5)  See:  Ibn Qudamah, Al-Mughn," [7:  I10-I11].
(6)  See:  Resolution No.  (9/1):  "Fatawa Nadwat Al Baraka" No.  9,  (P.  151).
(7)  See:  Resolution No.  (11/8):  "Fatawa Nadwat Al Baraka" No.  11,  (P.  194)



353





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Mush arakah ),  and Modern  Corpo rations

Capital  of Sharikah
• The basis for the permissibility that Sharikah  capital  may be contributed in the  form of tangible assets other than cash,  after valuation, is  that the purpose  of Sharikah  is  to give  partners  a right  to use  the  contributed money freely and to share the profit.  This objective is realisable  even if the capital  is contributed  in the form  of tangible assets just  as it is in the case of a contribution  in cash.  Therefore,  it is just as valid to present tangible assets for Sharikah  investment as to present cash. At the liquidation,  each one of the  partners  will be entitled to the equivalent value  of the  assets presented  at the conclusion  of the  Sharikah.""  This  is   the view of the Maliki and the Hanbali scholars."
The basis for the requirement that a payment of contribution to Sharikah capital  in  a  currency   different   from   the  designated  currency   of partnership  must  be  valued  according  to the  current exchange  rate at  the  time  of payment   is that  this  action  is   a currency   exchange between  two  currencies   which  is   permitted  provided   it  is carried out at the current exchange rate.  This is  evidenced  by the Hadith  in which Ibn Umar asked  the Prophet  (peace be upon  him) concerning selling camels  at (a  place  in Medina  called  Al-Baqi')  in a currency and  collecting  payment  in  a different  currency.  The  Prophet  (peace be  upon  him)  endorsed  the transaction   provided  it had  taken  place according  to the current  exchange rate.0
• The  basis  for  the  requirement  that  the investments  of parties  in the
capital  should  be properly  determined  is  that failure to do so will lead to  ambiguity  in  respect  to  the capital.  It is  not permissible  that  the capital  of Sharikah  be  ambiguous  since certainty  as to the  amount  of the capital is a benchmark  for sharing profit.  The equitable distribution of profit is  not possible  if the amount  of capital  contributed  by each party is  ambiguous.(
• The basis  for rejecting  payment  of partnership  capital  in receivables alone is that debts owed to a partner  by another partner  cannot actually be used in partnership  operations,  as they are not assets in possession.

(8)  4!-Mugh" [7:  124]
(9)  "Hashiya AI-Dusuqf" [2:  517];  and "AI-Maughn [5:  17].
( 10)  The source of the Hadith has been stated earlier.
(II) "AL-Mugh" [7:  125].



354





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah),  and Modern  Corporations

Again,  this may potentially lead to Riba wben the partner  is the one in debt.     However,  if the receivables are combined with other assets and the ratio of debt to the total assets is negligible, then debt and the other assets can be presented as a contribution  to partnership  capital. The basis for this is the principle of Tab'iyyah (things dependent  on another  thing) as per the legal maxim: "A  thing whicb in fact follows from another thing follows it also in law and judgment cannot be given separately for a thing that follows from another" and the legal maxim: "The law is flexible  in things that follow from another.
■  The basis for allowing current  accounts  as capital  in partnership  is that,  in spite  of their being considered as loan,  they are presumed to be possessed by the accountholders because the funds are available on demand. This  is because the Institutions are obliged by their regulations and directives  of the supervisory bodies to pay the owner on demand or accept cheques against these accounts irrespective of the financial situation of the Institution.
Managing a Partnership
■  Tbe basis for the right of each partner to participate in the management of the partnership  is tbat partnership  is  based on elements of agency and trust. Tbe element of agency requires that each party be entitled to be involved in the operations in a manner that is  in the interest ct the partnership. The element of trust requires that each party act for the benefit of the partnership."
• Tbe basis for  not allowing a fixed remuneration  for  a  partner  who assists in the management  is  that this may lead to guaranteeing the capital of this partner, or to his not being exposed to risk ofloss,  if any, in proportion  to his contribution  in the capital.
■   The basis for the permissibility  of appointing, by, a separate independent
contract, one partner to manage the partnership and the permissibility of paying him wages is  that the partner  becomes an employee of the company and be is not acting in the capacity of a partner.

(12)  "Hashiyat AI-Dusuqi"  [3:  517]; and "Al-Maughn?" [5:  17].
(13)  See:  41Mughnt" [7:  128].



355





Shari 'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah   (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

Guarantees in Partnership
■  The basis of the requirement  that a partner  is  not liable except in cases of misconduct   or negligence,  and  of the  impermissibility  of a stipu• lation  to  the  effect  that  a partner   guarantees  the  capital  of another partner,  is  that partnership operates  on the basis of trust,  and to hold a trustee  liable for losses  (except  in  the case of misconduct  or negli• gence)  is  impermissible.9
■  The basis for allowing a party to a partnership  to require a guarantee or a mortgage  from another  party as security against cases of misconduct and the like is  that this requirement  does not conflict with the rules for partnership.  Again,  the general principle  cf contracts  and partnerships is that parties are required to observe stipulated terms as far as possible.5
The basis for the permissibility cf a "promise to guarantee" by a third party
whose financial liability is  independent  from the parties to a partnership is  that this action  is  a mere charitable  act and  an  undertaking   that  is independent  of the partnership  contract.  In other words,  a fulfilment  of a promise by a third party is  not a condition  for the permissibility of the
contract. In addition, the third party's guarantee does not adversely affect
the established Shari'ah  principle against guaranteeing  capital or profit. A resolution  was issued  by International   Fiqh Academy in support  of the permissibility  of a third party's promise to guarantee.0
■  The basis for the requirement  that the guaranteeing  Institution  should not  be  the owner of the guaranteed  Institution  or vice versa is  that by ownership the transaction becomes in substance a guarantee by a partner of the capital of another partner,
Outcome  of Partnership  Investment (Profit and  Loss)
■  The basis for  the  impermissibility  of an agreement  to  determine  the profit share on the basis of a lump sum or a percentage  of the capital is because this is inconsistent with the sharing of profit and because profit is not realised unless  the capital is  maintained  intact.

(14)  See:  Ibn  Qudamah,  "Al-Kaf  [2:  230]; and Al-Mubdr  [4:  256].
(15)  See:  Fatwa (I/5)  of Al Baraka  First Forum,  1403  A.H.:  "Qararat  Wa Fatawa Nadwat
Al Barak" (P.  18).
(16)  International  Fiah Academy resolution No.  30 (5/4).



356





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah),  and Modern Corporations

• The basis for the impermissibility of deferring the statement of the profit ratio of each party until  profit  is  realised is  because  such a procedure involves  uncertainty  which  may potentially  lead  to  dispute.  However,
the parties are entitled  to amend the profit ratio or to relinquish  a right
to profit on the date of distribution.  This is  because the profit  belongs to  them;  hence,  it is   permissible  for  them  to  make  amendments   or relinquishments.
■  The basis for the requirement that the profit share may be either pro•
portionate  or disproportionate to the contribution of each party  in the capital is  that  an individual  deserves  a share  in profit  on the basis of the funds  contributed,  the work done  or the  risk borne.  If an indivi•
dual is  involved  in any of these three,  then  it  is  allowed for the parties to agree on a profit ratio accordingly. 'This is  the opinion  of the Hanafi and Hanbali  schools.(7
■  The basis for the  impermissibility  of one party  bearing  losses  or that
each party  bear  a portion  of losses  that  may not  be  proportionate  to the share of each party  in the capital is  the saying of Ali Ibn Abu Talib
(may Allah  be pleased  with  him):  "Profit  distribution is  according  to agreement  of the partners  and loss must be borne  in proportion to the contribution in the capital"  Therefore,  it is a void condition  that one party  should  bear the loss  cf other  parties  and such a condition facili• tates misappropriation  of the property  of others.
■  The basis for the permissibility  cf the partners  agreeing en any method for allocation  of profit,  whether  fixed or variable  during  a particular period, is that this agreement  is circumscribed with a condition  that the
method  adopted  should  not contravene  any Shari'ah  principle,  which
means the method  should not preclude a party from sharing in profit.
• The basis for not allowing final distribution of profit before deduction of expenses and expenditure is that there  is  no profit unless the capital is maintained  intact.

(17)  See: AI-Mirghinani, AIHidayah Sharh AL Bdayah" [3: 7-8], A]-Maktabah Al-Islamiyyah edition; AI-Kasani, 'Bada '?' AI-Sana '1" [6: 62-63]; and Ibn Muflih, Al-Mubdf [5: 4], Al• Maktab Al-Islami edition
(18)  This Athar has been reported by Ibn  Abu  Shaybah in his "Musannaf" [4:  268],  Riyadh:
Maktabat Al-Rushd.



357





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah),  and Modern Corporations

• The  basis  for the  impermissibility of specifying  a lump  sum  profit amount for one partner is that this action is inconsistent with sharing in profit.
The basis for  not allowing a partner  to earn  a share of profit and  a fee
simultaneously  is  that this fee  is  a lump  sum that may preclude  sharing in profit  due  to  the  possibility  that  the  partnership   business  may not realise  enough  profit  to  cover it.  The  basis for allowing  a partner   to receive, based on a separate contract, a fee is that the contract that entitles a partner  to a fee  is not part of the partnership contract  and because this fee is  not inconsistent  with sharing in profit,  as the partner  in this case is considered  to be a third  party.
The  basis  for  the  permissibility  of an  agreement  that  if the  profit
realised is  above a certain ceiling,  the profit over such ceiling belongs to a particular partner,  is  because this constitutes  a valid  condition that  is not inconsistent with profit sharing."Moreover,  the capital provider is  the one who will bear losses,  if any.
• The basis for the permissibility of distributing profit based on construc•
tive valuation  is  that  the use of this method  is  permitted  by Sharf'ah9 and was used in a number  of cases,  such as Zakah and theft.  The basis for the permissibility of constructive valuation  is  also the saying of the
Prophet  (peace be upon him):  lfa co-owner  of a slave frees his part,  the
slave will  be set free  against  his property if he has property;  otherwise, it
will be valued  by fair value and freed.'a
• The  basis for the  permissibility of distributing  funds  to partners on account,  i.e. subject  to settlement and  refund  of any additional profit acquired  over  the  contribution  to  the  capital  on  the  date  of actual liquidation,  is  because  this  action  causes  no  damage   to  any  of the partners since the distributed funds  on account  are subject  to settle• ment  at a later  stage.

(19)  AL-Bahr AI-Zakhkhar" [5:  83],  Dar AI-Kitab Al-Islami  edition.
(20)  See  Resolution  No.  (4)  of the Islamic  Fiqh  Academy under the auspices  of  Muslim
World  League  that was issued   in  the 16  session  held in Mecca on 21-26/10/1422
A.H.;  the International  Islamic Flah Academy  resolution  No.  30 (5/4)  and Fatwa  No. (8/2)  issued during  the A! Baraka's  8 Forum  on Islamic Economics  in Fatawa  Al Baraka" (P.   134).
(21)  This Hadith  has been related  by Muslim,  See:  "Sahih Muslim" [2:  1140].



358





Sharl'ah  Standard  No. (12):  Sharikah (Musharakah),  and Modern Corporations

The basis for allowing distribution of partnership  revenues, including the capital  assets, prior to  liquidation  of the partnership  is  that  the partners suffer no damage from this and also the distribution is subject to review and reimbursement  when liquidation is  actually effected.
Termination of  Partnership
The basis for the rule that termination  of  partnership  will not affect obligations and actions that took place before it is  protection  of the remaining partners against any potential  damage.
The basis for  the impermissibility of a promise by one of the partners
to buy assets of the partnership  at face value is  that  this constitutes a guarantee of the capital which  is prohibited by Shari'ah.  The basis for the permissibility of a promise to buy the assets of partnership  at the market value  is that this does not constitute a guarantee of capital.
Modern Corporations
The permissibility of modern  corporations  is  dependent  on the prin• ciple of Shari'ah that human transactions  are, in principle, permissible (Mu bah)  as  long  as  there is   no clear injunction  against them, espe• cially in view of the fact that the categorisation  of any one or more of these corporations  had parallels in Shari'ah-nominate  contracts, such as Inan partnership, Mudarabah and the like.
Stock Companies
The basis for the permissibility of underwriting issues of shares without taking consideration is that this is an undertaking  that does not involve an impermissible  act,  such as  taking a  commission  for  a guarantee. The International Islamic Fiah Academy has issued a resolution in this respect.9
• The basis for the impermissibility of buying shares using an interest• based loan provided by a stockbroker or other party against a mortgage of the shares is  that this   is an interest-based  transaction  secured by

(22)  See:  International  Islamic Fiqh Academy  Resolution  No.  30 (5/4), and resolution  of Islamic Fiqh  Academy under the auspices of Muslim  World  League during  its  16th session.
(23)  See:  Abdul-Aziz A!-Khayyat,  "A!- Sharikar" [2:  158-159].
(24)  See: The International  Islamic Fiqh Academy Resolution No.  63 (J/7).



359





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah),  and Modern Corporations

shares.   In this  case, both  transactions are prohibited by  an explicit source that indicates that Allah,  the Almighty,  has cursed a person  who lives on interest-based transactions,  a person  who pays such  interest, and a person  who notarises  or acts as a witness for such transactions. The basis for  the impermissibility of selling  shares that  the seller does not  own  is that  this  constitutes  selling  of an item  that  one  does  not own or an involvement  in a transaction without  bearing  a risk which is prohibited by Shari'ah.
• The basis for  allowing a mortgage of shares  is that  mortgaging is  per•
missible.   Moreover,  anything  that  can  be  sold  may  be  presented  as a mortgage as in the case of shares  unless  the bylaws  of the company state otherwise  in which case the conditions stated  must be observed.
+  The basis for the permissibility  of "shares to the order of" (nominative
shares)  is  that  this  is a form  of transf erring  ownership of shares to another   investor.   The  acceptance  by  the  remaining   shareholders   of the  bylaws  of the  company  that  give a  right  to  transfer  is  an implied consent  to the transfer  of ownership. The  basis for  the permissibility
of "bearer shares" is that it is a sale of shares by a shareholder to another
investor.  The acceptance  by the  remaining  shareholders  of the bylaws of the company  that give a right to sell is  an implied consent  to the sale. The fact that the identification  and personality  of the new shareholder (the  purchaser)  is  not known  to other  shareholders  will not affect the sale as they may be provided with this information  if need be.7
• The  basis  for  the  impermissibility  of issuing  pref zrence   (pref 2rred) shares is that pref zrence shares are inconsistent  with profit sharing and involve depriving other  partners  of their  fair share of profit.9
■  The basis for the impermissibility of issuing shares that entitle the holder a participation in the net profit  and entitles  the company  to gradually redeem  the participation through  the distribution of profits before the termination of the company,  is because the funds the certificate holders receive constitute  profit  in  respect  of their  shares.  The claim that  the

{25)  See:  International  Islamic Fiqh  Academy Resolution  No.  63  (1/7). (26)   See:  International  Islamic  Fiqh Academy  Resolution  No.  63  (1/7).
{27)  See:  International  Islamic Fiqh  Academy Resolution  No.  63  (1/7). (28)  See:  International  Islamic  Fiqh  Academy Resolution  No.  63  (1/7).



360





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

participations are  redeemed  in consideration  for the  distributed  profit is invalid. Therefore, the certificate  holders remain  owners of the shares and are entitled to proceeds  when the company  is  liquidated.
Joint Liability Company
• The basis for  the permissibility of the undertaking  of partners  in a joint liability company  to  be  jointly  responsible  is that  the joint  liability in this way is  subject  to the rules for guarantees.  The permission  granted by  each  of them  to  the others  to  act  on  behalf  of the  company   is subject  to the rules of agency as in the case of Mufawadah  partnership which  combines  elements  ct guarantee and agency.  The partners  have consented to be liable jointly because there is  no gain  at the expense  of any of the partners  and no one is to be cheated.
■  The  basis for the  impermissibility  of bringing  in a substitute partner in a joint liability company  when the other  partners  did consent  to it is that the personality of the partner is significant  for the partners  because the liability ct the company  includes  his personal  assets and the substi• tute may not be in the same fi nancial  position as the partner.
Partnership  in Commendum
• The basis for the impermissibility of sleeping partners of partnership in commendum or company  limited  by shares being  entitled  to interfere in the management of the company  is that  they have agreed not to do so and this agreement  does not affect the rules  of partnership.
■  The  reason   why  the  financial   liability  of  the  sleeping   partners  in partnership in commendum  is  limited  to their  shares  is that  they  are in the position of capital  providers  in a Mudarabah contract.
Allotment (Particular)  Partnership
The basis for  the permissibility  of unilateral  termination  of participation in this kind of partnership  by any of the partners  is  that,  in principle, unilat• eral termination of participation  is  allowed provided  such action  inflicts no damage to any of the partners  as per the saying of the Prophet (peace be upon him}:  "No  harm   to be inflicted and  no reciprocal  harm.'3


(29)  See:  International  Islamic  Fiqh Academy  Resolution  No. 63  (1/7). (30)  See:  Abdul-Aziz  Al-Khayyat,  "A!- Sharikar" [2:  235]
(31)  The Hadith  has been related  by Ibn  Majah  in his Sunan" [2:  784]



361





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah   (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corpo rations

Diminishing Partnership
• The basis for  saying that all the general  rules for partnerships,  especially the rules for 'Inan partnership, are applicable to diminishing partnerships is  to safeguard  this new form  of partnership from becoming  a mere interest-based financing transaction  in which a client undertakes to pay another  party  for his finance  in addition  to a share in the partnership income.
+  The basis for  the impermissibility  of one partner  being responsible  for the expenses of insurance or maintenance  is  that  this condition  is  in conflict with the nature of the partnership  contract.93





































(32)  See:  Fatwa No.  (219)  of the Fatwas of Kuwait Finance  House.



362





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations





Appendix  (C) Definitions

Contract Partnership  (Sharikat al-'Aqd)

Contract partnership is  an agreement between  two  or  more  parties  to combine  their  assets or to merge their  services or obligations and liabilities with  the aim of making  profit.
Partnership of Ownership  (Sharikat al-Milk)
Partnership  cf ownership   (Sharikat  al-Mille) is  the  combination  cf the assets of two or more persons  in a manner  that creates a state of sharing  the realised  profit  CI  income or benefiting from  an  increase  in the value of the partnership assets. This combination cf assets for making  profit necessitates bearing losses,  if any.  The ownership  partnership  is created by:  events beyond the partners'   control  such as the inheritance  rights  of heirs  in the legacy  of a deceased person. This partnership  is also created by the wish cf the partners such as when two or more parties acquire common  shares in a particular asset.

Mufawadah Partnership

Mufawadah partnership  is  any  partnership  in  which  the  parties   are equal  in all respects,  such  as funds  contributed  by them,  their  right  to act and their  liability,  from  the commencement  of the partnership to the date of its  termination.

Sharecropping Partnership (Muzara'ah)

Sharecropping is partnership  in crops  in which  one party presents  land to another for cultivation and maintenance in consideration for a common defined  share  in the crop.

Irrigating Partnership  (Musaqat)

Irrigating partnership is a partnership that depends on one party presenting designated  plants/trees  that produce  edible fruits to another  in order to work on their irrigation  in consideration for a common  defined  share  in the fruits.



363





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah (Musharakah),  and Modern Corporations

Agricultural Partnership (Mugharasah)

Agricultural  partnership  is  a partnership   in which  one party  presents a treeless piece of land  to another  to plant trees on it on the condition  that they share  the trees and fruits  in accordance with a defined percentage.

Distribution of Proceeds and Profits

Distribution  of proceeds and profits is  a process of termination  an undi• vided ownership in the company by the final  distribution of the assets where• by  rights  of each partner  are defined and  common  shares  are partitioned into identified  sets  for each partner.  This  is  why distribution  is  defined as identification  of undefined shares  or proceeds of a particular  person.








































364

























