Shari'ah Standard No.  (15)



Ju'alah

(Revised Standard)












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        426
I.  Scope  of the Standard ............so.sos.sos.so.sso.so.ss.sos.sos.so.......      426
2.  Definition of Ju'alah                                 ,                                                          n.,         ..,..............                 426
3.  PermissibilityoftheJu'alah  .........so.sos.coos.so.coo.sass..co.sos.o.......      426
4.  Shari'ah Status of Ju'alah .........sos .so.so.s.sos. sos.so»sos.sos .sos. sos«sa ss .a. ....          426
5.  Elements of Ju'alah and Its Conditions..................................................        4Z7
6. Revocation   ofJu'alah............s.sos.sos..sos..sos.sos6......        429
7.  Distinction between Ju'alah  and ljarah ........sos»so»sos»osoooa...                 430
8.  Applications of Ju'alah...................sos.so........a.........0...............        430
9.  Role oflnstitutions in Ju'.alah..................................................................        431
IO.  Date of Issuance cf the Standard.............................................................        431
Adoption of  the Standard......................................................................        432
Appendices
Appendix (a):   Brief History cf the Preparation cf the Standard.............        433
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard....................................         435




















423








IN  THE NAME OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all  the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all  his companions





Preface


The purpose of this standard  is  to elaborate the definition  of Ju'alah,  to distinguish it from ljarah, to describe its  elements, conditions, legal status in the Shari'ah, fundamental rules, and applications in the transactions  of Islamic fi nandal Institutions (Institution/Institutions),irrespective of the institution  acting as the  general  offeror (demanding performance)  or as the worker (under an obligation to perform), even when this  is  through another,  parallel Ju'alah.


























(1) The  word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer,  in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



425





Shari'ah  Standar d No  (15):  Ju'alah





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope  of the Standard

This standard sets out fundamental rules of the Shari'.ah on Ju'alah and its application in activities for which the extent of the work required cannot be precisely  determined  for it  continues  throughout  the determined period.  It is  for this reason that it does not cover the contract of ljarah for employment/service or leasing, just as it does not cover maintenance contracts or stipulations of maintenance in relation to other contracts, such as the requirement of maintenance in a sale contract or an Istisna'a contract (construction contract).

2. Definition of Ju'alah

Ju'alah  is  a contract  in which  one of the parties  (the  Ja'il)  offers  spec• ified compensation  (the  Ju'l)  to anyone (the  'Amil)  who will achieve a determined  result in a known or unknown period.

3. Permissibility of Ju'alah

Ju'alah is  permissible deeming the determination of the  end result to be realised through it as sufficient, and it is  not affected  by the uncertainty that prevails with respect to the subject-matter of the contract,  that is, the  work to be done.  It is  for this reason that Ju'alah is suitable   for activities for which Ijarah, which requires that the desired work be clearly specified, is not.

4. Shari'ah Status of Ju'alah

4/1  With due consideration to item (6) below in respect to the revocation of Ju'alah,  Ju'alah,  in  principle, is not a binding contract. The general offeror ([a'il) or the worker ('Amil) are entitled to revoke it unilaterally, however, it becomes binding for the Jail when the worker commences work. If the worker undertakes  not  to revoke the contract during a specified period,  it  is binding on him to abide  by the undertaking.



426





Sharf' ah Standard  No  (15):  Ju'alah

4/2   The  possession  of the worker  exercised  over  the  property   of the offeror  is that of a trustee.  He is, therefore,  not liable  except in the case of negligence, misconduct  or violation of the conditions  stipulated by the offeror.
5. Elements  of Ju'alah and Its  Conditions

The elements of Ju'alah  are: The two parties (the offeeror  and the worker), the  form  of the  contract   and the  subject-matter  of the  contract   (the compensation and the work).

5/1  The two parties to the contract (the  offeror  and  the worker)

The existence of legal capacity is  a condition  for both parties  to the contract. It is  not a condition  that the worker be specified, therefore, Ju'alah  is   concluded   by  the  issuance  of  an  offer  directed  at  the general public.  Any person  whom  the offer reaches may undertake the work himself or with the help  of another.  If, however,  the worker is  specified, it is obligatory for him to undertake  the work himself or with the express consent  of the offeror  through  someone  under  his supervision  and control.

5/2 Form of the contract

The  Ju'alah  contract  is  concluded  by  an  offer  directed  towards a specified  worker  or  towards  the  general  public,  irrespective  of such an offer being made  verbally, in writing or through  any other means  that  indicate   an  invitation   to  work  and  an  obligation   to pay the compensation.  Acceptance  of the offer  is  not stipulated  as a condition.
5/3 The subject  matter  of the contract (compensation and  work)

The subject  matter  of the contract  is the work that  is  agreed  upon through  Ju'alah  as well as the compensation for  the work.

5/3/1  Work that produces  the desired result

5/3/1/1 Among the forms of activity that may be agreed upon on the basis of the Ju'alah  contract  are the following:
a)  An activity that is  intended,  through  the agreement,
to produce a result such as the extraction of minerals.



427





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (15):  Ju'alah

b)  Any information in which the offror has an interest such as presenting a rep rt or study r the completi on f scientific works that realise a result, but in which the extent  f the work cannot be deter mined.
c)   An activity that is intended, thr ugh the agreement,
to return lost property to its seeker.

5/3/1/2  It  is  permissible to stipulate  that the job  is  done within a specified  period so that the worker will not be entitled to  compensation  after this  period,  except when the period is  over  and the  result is  close to realisation,  in which case the period will be automatically extended.

5/3/1/3 When the period is over and the worker has done (part of) the work that will benefit the offeror, the worker  is entitled to reasonable wages (Ujrat al-Mithl).

5/3/1/4  The Ju'alah  contract is  valid   despite  uncertainty as  to the nature ct the work, provided that the required result realised  by the work is determined.

5/3/1/5 It is  a condition  that the work involves  some  type of
effort.

5/3/1/6 It is  a condition  that the work not be obligatory for the worker.

5/3/2  The compensation

5/3/2/ The compensation should be  known, valuable in the eyes f the Shari'ah, and deliverable. Ifthe compensation is  unknown,  unlawful  or not deliverable, payment of reasonable compensation becomes binding.

5/3/2/2 The compensation  may be a portion  of the object  of work in Ju'alah,  for instance,  a percentage of a  debt agreed upon for collection or the right to utilise,  for a determined period, a project whose implementation
is agreed  upon.



428





Sharf' ah Standard  No  (15):  Ju'alah

5/3/2/3 As a rule,  entitlement  to compensation  is not estab• lished until the work is completed  and delivered to the offeror.  The following are the exceptions  to the rule:
a)  Where it is evident that the work undertaken  by the worker belongs to someone other than the offror and has been decreed as such, the worker is entitled to the compensation.
b)  Where an accident occurs during work undertaken by   the worker  causing loss  that  was not  due  to the tort or negligence of the worker,  the worker is entitled to full  compensation.

5/3/2/4It  is  permissible  to  stipulate  that  all or  part  of the compensation  be paid in advance at the conclusion of the contract  or thereafter,  even though  this is  before the completion of the entire work,  however,  it is  con• sidered  "subject  to  accounts"  and the worker  is  not
entitled to it without the realisation of the result, the
offeror having the right to reclaim it if the work is not realised.
6. Revocation  of Ju'alah

6/1   If the offeror,  or the worker,  revokes the contract prior to the com•
mencement of work, the worker is not entitled to compensation.

6/2  If the offeror prevents  the worker from working after commencement
of  the work, the offeror is  bound to pay reasonable wages.

6/3  If Ju'alah  contract is terminated  by  the worker  after the work is commenced;  the worker  is  not entitled  to a reward,  except when the parties agree to otherwise.

6/4 If the worker revokes the contract after commencing  the work,  he has no claim against the offeror, unless they had agreed to the con• trary.



429





Sharf'ah  Standard  No. (15):  Ju'alah

7.  Distinction between  Ju'alah  and ljarah

Ju'alah  is  distinguished  from Ijarah on the following grounds:

7/1   Ju'alah is valid despite uncertainty  of work deeming the determination
of the required result by the offeror  as sufficient.

7/2  Ju'alah  does not require acceptance.

7/3 Entitlement  to compensation  depends  on completion  of work and delivery of result.

7/4  Ju'alah  is  valid even if the other party is  not known.

7/5 As a rule,  Ju'alah  is terminable,  while ljarah   is binding.

8. Applications of Ju'alah

Among the applications of Ju'alah  in activities where the extent of work is  undetermined and in which uncertainty  is  overlooked are:
8/1   Exploration for minerals and extraction of water

Ju'alah  contract  may be  used  for the  exploration  for  minerals  and the extraction  of water in situations  where entitlement  to  wages is contingent  upon the finding of minerals or water without reference to the amount  of time or the extent of the period.

8/2  Collection of debts

Ju'alah is used for collecting debts in cases where the entitlement to compensation  is  contingent  upon the collection  of all of the debt,  in which case entitlement to the entire compensation  is  established, or part  of the debt so that compensation  proportionate to the amount of debt collected is due.

8/3 Securing permissible financing facilities

8/3/1  Securing permissible financing facilities means that the worker undertakes  some  work that  leads  the  institution  to  agree to the granting  of financing facilities to the offeror  or to arrange syndicated financing.
8/3/2 Ju'alah  contract  may be  used  for securing  facilities  provided that the condition  of the permissibility of Ju'alah  is met, that is,



430





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (15):  Ju'alah

the subject-matter of Ju'alah  must  be valid  such as the creation of debt  through Murabahah on deferred  payment,  ljarah  with deferred rental, raising of loans without interest,  issuance  of letters   of guarantee  or  the  opening  of documentary  credit with the  condition that  the  transactions are not  employed  for raising  interest  bearing loans through stipulations, customary practice or dealings  among  institutions.

8/4 Brokerage

Ju'alah  is  used in brokerage  activities in cases where  the entitlement to compensation  is  contingent upon  the conclusion of the contract for which  intermediation  is undertaken.
8/5 Discoveries, inventions  and  designs

Ju'alah is  used for the realisation of scientific discoveries, innovative inventions  and  designs,  such  as symbols  and  trade  marks,  where entitlement to  compensation  is  contingent upon  the  realisation  of the discoveries,  the registration  of patents  or the creation  of designs
conforming to the conditions  elaborated  by the offeror.

9. Role of Institutions in Ju'alah

9/1  It is  permissible for an institution to have the status  of a worker  in Ju'alah  by  contract,  for  work  benefiting others   irrespective  of the institution  undertaking the  work  itself  or  by  contracting  out  the
work through another Ju'alah that is in the nature of a parallel, unless it is stipulated that  the institution will carry  out the work  itself. It is obligatory that  the two Ju'alahs  are not linked.

9/2  It is  permissible for an institution to have  the  status  of the  offeror whether the  work  benefits  the institution  or is for  the fulfilment  of its obligation in a Ju'alah  for the benefit  of another (parallel  Ju'alah) ensuring that  the two Ju'alahs are not linked.

10. Date  of Issuance of the Standard

This Shari'ah Standard was issued on 7 Rab!' I,  1424 A.H., corresponding to 8 May 2004 A.D.



431





Sharf' ah Standar d No  (15):  Ju'alah





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah  Standard  on Ju'alah  was adopted  by the Shari'ah  Board  in its  meeting  No.  (9)  held during  the period  of 11-16 Ramadan  1423  A.H., corresponding  to 16-21  November  2002 A.D.













































432





Sharf' ah Standard  No  (15):  Ju'alah





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No.  (7) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah during the period of 9-13  Ramadan 1422  A.H.,  corresponding to 24-28 November 2002 A.D., the Shari'ah Board resolved to give priority to the preparation af the Shari'ah Standard for Ju'alah.

On Saturday 14 Shawwal 1422 A.H., corresponding to 29 December 2001
A.D., a Shari'ah consultant was commissioned to prepare a juristic study and an exposure draft on the Shari'ah Standards  for Ju'alah.

In its  meeting No.  (1)  held  on 9 Safar  1423  A.H.,  corresponding  to
20  April 2002 A.D., in the Kingdom of  Bahrain,  the Shari'ah  Standards Committee discussed the exposure draft of the standard and made some amendments.
In its meeting No. (2) held on 20 and 21  Rabi' I,  1423 A.H., corresponding to 1  and 2 June 2002 A.D., in the Kingdom of Bahrain,  the Committee also discussed  the exposure draft of the standard and asked the consultant to make the necessary amendments in light of comments and discussions  of the members.

In its  meeting No.  (3)  held on 20 Rabi'  II,  1423  A.H.,  corresponding to  l   July 2002 A.D., in the Kingdom of  Bahrain, the Committee further discussed the exposure draft and made amendments that it deemed suitable in preparation of the submission of the exposure draft to the Shari'ah Board.

The revised exposure draft of the Shari'ah  standard was presented to the Shari'ah Board in its 9th meeting held in Makkah AI-Mukarramah during the period of 11-16 Ramadan 1423 A.H, corresponding to 16-21  November 2002
A.D.  The Shari'ah  Board  made further amendments to the exposure draft of
the standard  and resolved  that   it be  distributed to specialists  and interested



433





Shari'ah  Standar d No  (15):  Ju'alah

parties  for  soliciting their  comments  in preparation  of their  discussion  in a public hearing.
A public  hearing  was held  in Bahrain  on  18  Dhul-Hajjah   1423  A.H., corresponding to  19  February  2003 A.D.  The public hearing  was attended by more  than  thirty  participants   representing  central  banks,  institutions,
accounting  firms, Sharf'ah  scholars, academics and others having interested in  this  field.  The  public  hearing  was  based  on  the  observations   made whether  these transmitted prior to the public hearing or were raised during the public hearing.  The members  of the Shari'ah  Standards  Committees  ( 1) and (2)  responded  to the observations  and comments.

The  Shari'ah  Standards  Committees   (1)  and  (2)  held  a joint  meeting on 2  Muharram   1424  A.H.,  corresponding to  5 March  2003 A.D.,  in the Kingdom  of Bahrain  to discuss  the  comments   made  during  the  public hearing  as  well as those  sent  received  in writing,  inserting  amendments deemed suitable.
The Shari'ah Board in its I0" meeting held in AI-Madinah Al-Munawwarah during  the  period  of 2-7  Rab?'  I,   1424  A.H.,   corresponding   to  3-8 May
2003  A.D.,  discussed the amendments  suggested by the Shari'ah  Standards Committee,  and incorporated  the amendments  that  it found  suitable.  The Shari'ah Board unanimously adopted some of the items cf the standard  and some items were adopted by the majority vote of the members of the Shari'ah Board,  as recorded in the minutes cf the meetings cf the Shari'ah Board.

The Shari'.ah Standards Review Committee  reviewed the standard in its meeting  held on Rabi'  I1,  1433  A.H., corresponding to  March 2012  A.D, in the State of Qatar, and proposed  after deliberation  a set  of amendments (additions,   deletions,   and  rephrasing)   as  deemed   necessary,   and   then
submitted  the proposed  amendments  to the Shari'ah Board  for approval as
it deemed  necessary.

1n  its  meeting No.  (41)  held in AI-Madinah Al Munawwarah,  Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia during the period of 27-29 Sha'ban 1436  A.H., corresponding to
14-16 rune 2015 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the proposed amendments submitted  by the Shari'ah  Standards  Review Committee. After deliberation, the  Shari'ah Board  approved necessary amendments,  and  the standard  was
adopted in its current amended version.



434





Sharf' ah  Standard  No  (15):  Ju'alah





Appendix  (B)

The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Permissibility  of Ju'alah

Ju'alah  contract  is  permissible according to the majority  of the Fuqaha on the basis of the  Qur'an,  the Sunn ah,  Ijma'  (consensus  of Fuqaha)  and Ijtihad  (reasoning) .
• As for the Qur 'an,  the evidence  is in the story of Yusuf (Joseph) and his brother  after the announcement of the loss of the King's great  beaker,
{"For him  who brings it is  the (reward of)  a camel load;  I will stand
surety for  it}.
• As for the Sunn ah, the evidence  is in the report from Abu Sa'id Al-Khu• driabout the stipulation of Jul (compensation) ifthe chief of the tribe was cured through  him and the tacit approval of the Prophet  (peace be upon  him)  of this.
• There is  ljma' (consensus  of Fuqaha)  about the contract of Ju'alah in es• sence with some disagreement about  its scope insofar  as some Fuqaha restricted it to reward  for the return  of a runaway  slave,  as  is  recorded in the Sunnah.
• As for Ijtihad  (reasoning), there is a general need for Ju'alah  in the case
of acts that  cannot  be performed by a person  himself nor  can he find someone  who will volunteer  for him.  Further,  it is  suitable for cases for which the contract of Ijarah  is  not suitable, like the return  oflost prop• erty from an unknown location.
Shari'ah Status of Ju'alah
• The basis for the  principle  that  Ju'alah  is  not binding  for  the  offeror  is
that accrual of the compensation  is  contingent  upon a condition,  thus,

-
(2)  [Yusuf (The Prophet Joseph): 72]
(3)  "Sahih Al-Bukhari"" [5:  2166].



435





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (15):  Ju'alah

it resembles  bequest,  which  is  not binding.  The basis for  Ju'alah  being non-binding for  the worker  is  that the work  to be  done  is uncertain, thus, it resembles  Mudarabah,  which is not binding.
• The basis for regarding Ju'alah as binding when the worker has commenced work is  that  at this  stage Ju'alah  is  similar  to Mudarabah in which  the Mudarib  has commenced work. like Mudarabah, Ju'alah is  considered binding  by the Maliki scholars in such a case.  The basis for  considering it binding  when the two parties undertake  not to terminate the contract during the period of the contract  is that unilateral revocation leads to the loss  of the effort put in by the worker or the likelihood  of injury  for  the fferor.
• The basis for the entitlement of the worker to receive reasonable  wages, when the contract  is revoked after commencement of work, is that the work done by the worker  is  legally valid  and loss is not to be caused to him.  He,  therefore,  has recourse  to reasonable  compensation as is  the case in ljarah  when  it is  revoked  due to a def ct.
Elements of Ju'alah and Its Conditions
• The basis  for the rule that it is  obligatory  in Ju'alah  that all its elements (two  parties,  form,  work  and compensation)  be found   is that  it is a contract and must have these elements. Further, Ju'alah is a commutative
contract  that must have a form to indicate the task required as well as the amount  of compensation.
• The basis for permitting  the worker to seek assistance from others, when
there is no stipulation for his personal services, is that Ju'alah is similar to agency ii. which seeking help from others is valid.
• The  basis  for  not  stipulating  the  identification  of the  worker   and
directing the offer  towards  the general  public  is that the offeror does not know of a person  who is able to achieve what  is required.
• The basis  for not stipulating acceptance  on the part of the worker, when
he is  unknown,  is that it is not possible to obtain his acceptance.
• The basis  fer allowing the work to be uncertain  is the general need along with the impossibility of determining the extent of work.
• The basis for  stipulating that compensation  be known  is  that compen•
sation  is like wages and that  there  is  no need  to validate  Ju'alah  when



436





Sharf' ah Standard  No  (15):  Ju'alah

the  compensation  is  unknown   as against  the  uncertainty  about  the work and the worker.
• The basis for recourse  to reasonable  compensation upon  the vitiation
of the named  compensation   is analogy  constructed   upon  ljarah  with recourse  to reasonable wages upon the vitiation of the named  wages.
• The basis for the permissibility  of compensation  being a portion  of the
subject-matter of Ju'alah,  even though  it is uncertain  and does not ex• ist, is that it is  a type of uncertainty that does not prevent delivery and involves no Gharar  (uncertainty) since entitlement  to compensation is not established  until the task is accomplished.
• The basis for the rule that entitlement  to compensation  is not established
until the work is completed  and delivered, is  that work in Ju'alah is  not determined or certain, therefore, stipulating  payment as compensation would amount  to compensating something  that has not compensation because the work has not been completed.
Applications  of Ju'alah
• The basis for permitting an institution  to undertake  Ju'alah,  as a worker or as an offeror, is the permissibility  of Ju'alah for which natural persons and juristic  persons  have the same legal  capacity.
• The basis for the permissibility  of Ju'alah  for debt collection,  and other
similar acts stated  in the standard,  is  that these  are acts whose precise determination  is difficult and ljarah is not suitable  for them, while Ju'alah is  legally valid  despite  the uncertainty with respect to work




















437


























