Shari'ah Standard No.  (11)



Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a


(Revised Standard)












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        296

I.  Scope of the Standard ............so.sos«sos.so.sso.so.ss.sos.sos.so..o....                            296
}  Istisnaa Contract ......sssssssss.sos»ssssssssss.sos»sos·sos.sos>sos.sos»sos..so.                            296
3.  Subject-Matter of, and Guarantees in, Istisna'a..........................        298
4.  Changes to lstisna'.a Contract..................................................................        302
5.  Supervision  of the Execution of an Istisna'a Contract.....-......        304
6.  Delivery and Disposal of the Subject-Matter.....-..a-.....        305
7,  Parallel [stisnaa  ~..us«so+rue+so+rue»suss+roe»suers»mo»suers»or»roes+ore»,                 307
8.  Date of Issuance cf the Standard............................................................        308
Adoption  of the Standard......................................................................        309
Appendices
Appendix (a)   Brief History cf the Preparation of the Standard..............        310
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah   Basis for the Standard....................................         313
Appendix (c):   Definitions.............................................................................         319





















293








IN  THE NAME OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household  and all his companions





Preface


The objective of this standard is to explain the Shari'ah rulings and lim• itations applicable to Istisna'a and parallel Istisna'a transactions in respect to concluding an Istisna'a contract, the subject-matter of Istisna'a and changes to the contract. The standard also explains issues  relating to the execution of the contract and the supervision of its execution.



































295





Shan'ah  Standard  No. (11):  Istisna'a  and Parallel Istisna'a





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope  of the Standard

The standard  covers Istisna'a and parallel  Istisna'a transactions whether the Institution is  acting as an ultimate purchaser or is acting as a manufacturer or as a builder for construction.

2. Istisna'a Contract

2/1  Conclusion  of an Istisna'a contract at the time of contracting  or after the bilateral promise
2/1/1  It is  permissible that the  Institution and a customer conclude an Istisna'a contract before  the Institution  assumes title to the subject-matter to  be  sold  to  the customer or to the  materials from which the subject-matter will be produced (manufactured or constructed).

2/1/2 I is permissible for the  Institution to benefit from any price offers or quotations that the customer has obtained from other dealers or suppliers  to assist it  in the evaluation  of expenses and the computation of prospective profit.
2/1 /3  It is  not permissible that the Institution's role in the Istisna'a be that of a financial  intermediary between a buyer and a third party,  especially if the buyer has  become unable to meet his obligations  toward such  a third  party,  and this  prohibition applies  whether such   a role  would talce place  before or after the commencement of the work.  [see  item 4/2/2]

(1)  The  Arabic  term  "lstisna'a  applies  to  both manufacturing and construction,  and there is no convenient  term  in English  that  covers both manufacturers and builders. Therefore, the term "manufacturer" will be used in this standard to designate  a party acting as manufacturer   or contractor  in an Istisna'a contract,  and the term  'subject• matter' will be used to designate the goods or buildings that are the subject-matter of the contract.



296





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

2/2  Form  and  conditions of an Istisna'a contract

2/2/1 A contract  of Istisna'a  is binding  on the  contracting parties provided   that  certain  conditions   are fulfilled,  which  include specification   of the  type,  kind,  quality  and  quantity   of the subject-matter  to  be  produced.  Moreover,  the  price  of the subject-matter must  be known  and, if necessary,  the delivery date  must   be   determined.  If the   subject-matter  does  not conform  to the  specification   agreed  upon,  the  customer has the option  to accept or to refuse the subject-matter.

2/2/2  Since a contract of Istisna'a is  binding, the parties to the contract are  inevitably  bound   by   all   obligations   am   consequences flowing from  their  agreement.  In other  words, the contracting
parties  need not to renew an exchange of offer and acceptance after  the  subject-matter  is   completed.  This  is  different  from the  promise  in a contract  of Murabahah,  which  requires  the signature of a sale contract  through  a new offer and acceptance by the parties  when possession  of the items  to be sold is  taken by the Institution.

2/2/3  It  is  not  permitted for  the  manufacturer to  stipulate  in the contract  of Istisna'a that  he is  not liable for def cts.

2/2/4 It is  not  permissible  to  conclude   Istisna'a  contracts or  pro• cesses of Istisna'a  in a manner  that  makes it a legal  device for a mere interest-based financing. Examples are a transaction in which the Institution  buys items from the contractor on a cash payment   basis  and  sells them  back  to  the  manufacturer  on a def rred payment  basis at a higher  price;  or where the party ordering  the subject-matter to be produced  is the manufactur•
er himself;  or where one third  or more of the facility in which
the subject-matter will be produced belongs  to the customer. All the circumstances mentioned  above would  make the deal an interest-based  financing  deal in  which  the  subject-matter never genuinely changes hands, even if the deal is won through competitive  bidding.  This  rule  is  intended  to  avoid sale and
buy back transactions  (Bay' al-' Inah).



297





Shan'ah  Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

3. Subject-Matter of, and Guarantees in, Istisna'a

3/1  The rulings concerning al-Masn0o'

3/1/1  An Istisna'a  contract  is  permissible  only for  raw materials  that can be transformed from their natural  state by a manufacturing or  construction  process  involving  labour.  Therefore,  Istisna'a is  valid  only  in so far  as  the  supplier  has  agreed  to  provide a subject-matter that is  manufactured or constructed.

3/1/2  It is  permissible  that  a contract   of Istisna'a  be  concluded   for the production of a subject-matter having unique  descriptions according  to the requirement of the ultimate purchaser  even if such a subject-matter has no substitutes in the market, provided the  subject-matter  is  subject  to specification.  Similarly,  it  is permissible that the subject-matter of a contract of Istisna'a be items  that  have perfect  substitutes  in the  market,  and  can be substituted for one another  in fulfilling an obligation, because they share common   characteristics by virtue  of the process  of manufacture  or  construction.  This  rule  applies  whether   the items to be produced are intended for consumption or for use with their substance kept intact.

3/1/3 It is not  permissible  that  the  subject-matter  of  an  Istisna'a contract be an existing and identified capital asset.  For example, it is  invalid  for  the  Institution  to conclude  a contract to  sell a particular designated  car or factory  on the basis  of Istisna'a. This  is  because  Istisna'a  is  a sale contract  applicable to items that  are identified  by specification,  not by designation.  Unless the  items  are  completely  or partially  delivered,  the  ultimate purchaser has  no  prior  right  (in  the  event  that  the  supplier is  declared  bankrupt  or  insolvent)  over a third  party  to the items that are the subject-matter of the contract while they are still in  the process  of being  produced  and have not yet been delivered  to him.  In addition,  the  ultimate  purchaser   cannot be regarded  as the owner  of the materials  in the possession  of the  manufacturer  for  the  purpose   of producing the  subject-



298





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

matter of the contract,  unless the manufacturer has previously undertaken,  as a guarantee for the completion  of the work, that such materials  will only be used for the order  of the ultimate purchaser.

3/1/4  The  contract  of Istisna'a  may be  concluded  with  a condition that  the  production   shall be  carried  out  by  the  Institution using its  own resources,  in which case it has to abide by this condition  and has no right to assign the process of production
to another  entity.

3/1/5  It is permissible  for the manufacturer to fulfil  his obligation in an Istisna'a  contract  by using  items  produced  by his  own resources   or  items  produced  by  other  parties   that  existed before   the  contract   was  concluded.   The  latter  option   is, however,  only valid if the ultimate  purchaser  did not stipulate that the manufacturer  should use his own resources. However, this  rule  should  not  be  used  as a device  for  deferment  of consideration   (the   price  and  the  commodity)   of a sale  of a subject-matter  that  is  to  be  delivered  in the  future  based on its  specification  as given by the  seller,  but which  are not intended  to be produced.

3/1/6 The manufacturer is  under  an obligation  to produce  the sub• ject-matter  according  to specification  and  within  the  period agreed  upon  or within  such reasonable  time  as the nature  of the  work  may permit,  in  accordance  with  accepted  practice
that is  recognised  by experts.

3/1/7 The  parties  may agree on a period  during which  the  manu• facturer  will be  liable for  any def cts  or  the  maintenance  of the  subject-matter.   They  may  also  leave  the  determination of liability  relating  to defects  and maintenance   to customary practice.
3/1/8  It is permissible  to draw up an lstisna'a contract  for real estate developments on designated land owned either by the ultimate purchaser  or the contractor,  or on land in which  either of them



299





Shan'ah Standard  No. (11):  Istisa'a  and Parallel  Istisna'a

owns the usufruct.  This is  permissible  because the contract involves  the construction  of specified buildings that  will be built and sold according to specification and the contract of Istisna'a in this  case does not concern a particular  identified place (i.e.  the land).

3/2 Price and guarantees of Istisna'a contract

3/2/1 It is a requirement  that the price for an Istisna'a contract  be known at the conclusion of the contract,  in which case it can be in the form  of cash or  tangible  goods or  the usufruct  of an asset for a particular  duration, whether  such usufruct  is related to an asset other than the subject-matter or to the sub• ject-matter itself. The use of usufruct of the subject-matter itself as  consideration  for an Istisna'a contract  is  relevant to situations when a government  offers  a preferential contract giving usufruct  to the builder  or manufacturer  for a partic• ular duration, commonly  known as Build  Operate  'Transfer (BOT)

3/2/2 The price  of an Istisna'a contract  may be def2rred  or paid in instalments within  a certain period  of time, or if delivery of the subject-matter is  to be made  in stages a portion  of the price may be paid immediately while the balance is paid by instalments  according  to the stages of delivery. It  is  also permissible to connect payment with the stage of completion of the work,  (such that a payment  is made al the end of each stage) provided the stages of this type of work are by custom subject to specification  and their identification will not lead to dispute.

3/2/3 If the process of manufacture or construction  is divided into phases,  or  payment  is   designed  according  to  the  stage of completion of the work, then the manufacturer or contractor is  entitled to request that the ultimate  buyer make payment accordingly for each stage that has been carried out according to specification.



300





Shan'ah  Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a  and Parallel Istisna'a

3/2/4 It is permissible that the price of Istisna'a transactions  vary in accordance with  variations  in delivery date.  There  is  also no objection  to a number  of offers being subject  to negotiation, provided   that  eventually  only  one  offer  will be  chosen  for concluding  the Istisna'a contract.  This is  to avoid uncertainty and lack of knowledge that may lead to dispute.
3/2/5  A contract of Istisna'a  cannot   be  drawn  up on  the  basis of a Murabahah sale,  for  example,  by determining the  price of Istisna'a on a cost- plus basis.

3/2/6 If the  actual  costs  incurred by  the  Institution  to  bring  the subject-matter to completion   are substantially   less  than  the estimated  costs or the Institution   secures a discount  from  the party  with whom  it  contracted on a Parallel Istisna'a basis to acquire  the  subject-matter  in order  to  fulfil  its contractual obligation,  the  Institution  is  not  obliged  to give a discount to  the ultimate purchaser and the latter is not entitled  to the amount   or part  thereof  the  Institution  has  gained  over  the estimated  costs.  The  same  rule  applies  conversely  when  the actual  costs of production are substantially greater  than  the estimated  costs.

3/3  Guarantees

3/3/1  It is permissible  for the Institution,  acting either in the capacity of the  manufacturer  or of the  ultimate  purchaser,  to give  or demand  accordingly  'Arboun as a guarantee, which  will either
be part  of the price,  if the contract  is  fulfilled, or forfeited,  if
the  contract  is  rescinded.  However,  it  is  pref rable  that  the amount  forfeited  be  limited  to an amount  equivalent  to the actual damage suffered.
3/3/2 In an Istisna'a  contract,  it is  permissible  for the  Institution, whether acting  in the capacity  of manufacturer or in the ca• pacity of the  ultimate  purchaser,  to demand  guarantees  that it considers  sufficient  to secure fulfilment of its  rights against



301





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

an ultimate purchaser or a manufacturer. It is also permissible for the institution, when  acting in the capacity of an ultimate purchaser, to give guarantees  requested  by the manufacturer, which  can  be  in a form  of a mortgage,  personal  guarantee, assignment  of rights, a current account, or an investment  ac• count  or consent  to blocking withdrawal  from  an account.

4. Changes to Istisna'a  Contract

4/1  Amendments,  changes and  introduction of new conditions

4/1/1  It is permissible,  after the conclusion  of an Istisna'a  contract, for  the manufacturer  and the  ultimate  purchaser  to agree on amending   the  manufacturing or  construction  specifications previously agreed upon or introducing  additional specification requirements on condition that the price is  adjusted accordingly and a reasonable period for the execution f the new requirements is  granted.  It is  also permissible  to state in the contract  that the consideration  for  amendments  or  introduction  of additional requirements  shall be  determined   and added  to  the  original price as per the expert  opinion,  custom  or an identified price index which preclude any uncertainty  that may potentially lead to dispute.

4/1/2  The  ultimate  purchaser  cannot  oblige  the manufacturer to introduce  modifications  and  changes to the subject matter  of an Istisna'a contract  without  the consent  of the manufacturer.

4/1/3  I is  not permissible  for amendments and changes to the contract to be agreed on the basis  that an additional  sum will be paid in consideration  for  an  extension  of the  period  of payment. However,  a rebate for pre-payment is permissible provided it is not stipulated at the conclusion of the contract.

4/2  Intervening  contingencies (force majeure)

4/2/1  It is permissible,  by way of agreement of the contracting  parties or arbitration  or judicial procedure,  to amend the contract price



302





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

of an Istisnaa  contract  upwards or downwards,  as a result of intervening  contingencies  (force  majeure).  This rule must be read together with item  4/1/3  above.

4/2/2 It is  permissible for the Institution  to replace a contractor  and enter  into an Istisna'a  contract  with a customer  to complete a project  which had been started  by the previous  contractor of such a customer.  In this case,  an assessment of the project should  be undertaken   on  the  basis  of the  existing  status  of the  project.  The cost of this  assessment  is  chargeable  to  the account of the customer,  in which case all outstanding  debts, if any, that arise from the incomplete  Istisna'a contract shall be the  personal  responsibility  of the  customer.  The parties  may after this  conclude a new Istisna'a contract  for the remaining work. The Institution  is  not bound  to deal with the previous contractor.  Rather,  the  Institution   has the  right  to  stipulate that  the  work needed  to complete  the project will be carried
out by any means it deems fit.

4/2/3 In the case of constructing  buildings or public utilities on land owned by the ultimate purchaser,  it  is  permissible to stipulate that the ultimate purchaser has the right to perform the contract of Istisna'a at  the  expense  of the  manufacturer   if the  latter fails  to perform  the  contract  or to  complete  the  work within a  particular  period of time,  and that  this  performance  will be effected from the date the manufacturer  halted the work.

4/2/4  If the contractor is unable to continue to discharge his obligation, the  ultimate purchaser  (the  owner of the  land)  is  not entitled to acquire ownership of the incomplete  building structures  or utilities  that are already in  place  without  giving consideration to the contractor.  However,  this  rule depends on the cause  of the failure  to continue the work. If the failure to perform is  due to the misconduct  of the contractor, the ultimate purchaser  is liable only for the value of  the building structure and the builder is  liable  to  compensate  the  uJtimate  purchaser  for  any actual



303





Shan'ah  Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

damage or loss he suffered. Ifthe failure to perform  is due to the misconduct  of the  ultimate purchaser, the contractor is entitled to the value of the work he has completed and compensation for any damage or loss.  However,  if the filure  to perform  has not been caused by either  of them,  the ultimate purchaser  is liable only for the value of the building structure that is already in place and neither of them has any responsibility  to pay compensation for  the  loss  or damage  the  other  party  had  suffered.  [see  item
4/2/3]

4/2/5  It is permissible  that a contract of Istisna'a  includes  a clause to the effect that if any additional  conditions are inserted into the contract  at a later date as a result of directives  of the relevant authorities,   and  these   additional  conditions  lead  to  extra expenses  that  cannot,  by virtue  of the  terms  of the  contract, be borne  by the  manufacturer because  they  were  not  in the original  contract  as signed  or  there  is   no  law  making  such payment  compulsory,, the extra expenses  will be borne  by the ultimate  purchaser.

5. Supervision  of the Execution of an Istisna'a Contract

5/1  It is  permissible  for the  seller and  purchaser   to appoint  technically experienced consulting firm to represent  it in determining whether the subject-matter conforms  to the contractual specification, and to advise the Institution  as to whether  payment  for the subject-matter, or  delivery  or  acceptance   of it,   under   the  terms  of the  contract, should  take place,  and they should  adhere  to its  resolutions

5/2  It  is  permissible for the Institution, when  acting as the manufacturer, to draw-up  an independent and separate contract  of agency appoint• ing the ultimate purchaser  as an agent of the Institution to supervise the  manufacturing or construction process  so as to ensure  that  the items produced conform  to contractual specification.
5/3  It is  permissible for the manufacturer and the ultimate purchaser  to agree on the party who will bear the additional  costs of supervision of an Istisna'a contract.



304





Shan'ah  Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a  and Parallel Istisna'a

6. Delivery  and  Disposal of  the Subject-Matter

6/1  The manufacturer is discharged  from liability if the subject-matter is delivered  to either  the ultimate purchaser or to a person  appointed by him or if the ultimate purchaser is enabled  to exercise full control over the subject-matter.

6/1/1  If the  condition  of the  subject-matter  does  not  conform  to the  contractual  specifications  at   the  date  of  delivery,   the ultimate  purchaser  has the right to reject the subject-matter or to accept it in its present condition,  in which case the acceptance
constitutes  satisfactory  performance   of the contract.  It is  also
permissible  for the contracting parties to agree on acceptance of a subject-matter  that  fails to conform   to the  specification even if such an arrangement involves  a price discount.

6/1/2  If the seller offers to deliver a better  quality, then the purchaser shall accept  his conditions,  provided  that  the seller  shall not charge  any  additional   amounts   for the  better  quality,  which may  be considered   one  of the  ways  in  which  a contract   is ethically fulfilled, unless the quality specified in the contract  is particularly pursued  by the purchaser.

6/2  It  is  permissible  that  delivery   of  the  subject-matter  takes  place before the due date, on condition that the subject-matter meets the specifications  agreed  upon,  in which  case  the  ultimate   purchaser is  obliged  to  accept  the  subject-matter.  If the  ultimate  purchaser
is  unwilling  to take delivery  of the  subject-matter,  the  rule  on this
point depends on whether or not there is justification forth is refusal. If there  is  a good  reason  for the rejection  of the subject-matter, the ultimate purchaser shall not  be obliged  to accept  it.  If there  is  not a good  reason  for rejecting  it, then  the ultimate  purchaser will be obliged  to accept  the subject-matter.
6/3  The delivery of the subject-matter may take place through  constructive possession,  by  enabling  the ultimate purchaser  to take control  over the subject-matter after the production process  is  completed.  At this



305





Shan'ah Standard  No. (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel  Istisna'a

point,  the liability of the manufacturer  in respect of the subject-matter comes to an end and the liability of the ultimate purchaser  begins. If after enabling the ultimate purchaser to take control  over the subject• matter any loss  or damage subsequently  occurs to the subject-matter without  any proof of negligence  or misconduct  on the  part of the manufacturer,  then the ultimate purchaser  is liable.   This is  therefore the  demarcation  line  between  the  liabilities ct the  two  parties:  the liability of the manufacturer  and the liability cf the ultimate purchaser.

6/4  If the ultimate purchaser  refuses to accept the subject-matter  without a good reason after he is enabled to take possession,  the subject-matter will remain in the possession of the manufacturer  on a trust basis,  in which case the manufacturer  will not be liable for loss  or damage that occurs  to it,  unless such loss  or damage is  a result of negligence or misconduct  on  the part of the manufacturer.  The ultimate purchaser bears the expenses for the safe keeping cf the subject-matter.

6/5  It is permissible to state in a contract of Istisna'a that the manufacturer will act as  the  agent  ct the  ultimate  purchaser  to  sell the  subject• matter  if there  is   a delay  on  the  part  of the  purchaser  in  taking delivery  of the  subject-matter  within  a particular   period  of time. In this case,  the manufacturer will sell the subject-matter on behalf ct the  ultimate  purchaser  and,  after deducting  the  agreed  contract price,  the  balance,  if any,  will be returned  to  the  purchaser.  If the price obtained  is less  than  the contract price, the manufacturer shall have a right of recourse to the ultimate purchaser for the recovery of the remaining  balance.  In addition,  the ultimate  purchaser  will bear the expenses incurred in selling the subject-matter.

6/6  It  is  permissible  for the contract  of Istisna'a  to include  a  fir penalty clause stipulating an agreed amount  of money for compensating  the ultimate purchaser  adequately if the manufacturer  is late  in delivering the subject-matter. Such compensation  is  permissible  only  if the delay
is  not caused by intervening  contingencies (force majeure).  However,
it is  not permitted  to stipulate a penalty clause against the  ultimate purchaser  for default  on payment.  [see  item  2/1/2  of the  Shari'ah Standard  No.  (3)  on Procrastinating  Debtor]



306





Shan'ah  Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

6/7  It is  not permissible to sell the subject-matter  prior  to taking either actual or constructive  possession  of it  [see item 6/4].  However, it is permissible  to conclude  an Istisna'a contract  to sell an item on the basis of description or specification  that  is similar  to an item  to be acquired  from a manufacturer,  and  this  is  called Istisnaa Muwazi: Parallel  Istisna'a [ see item  7].

6/8  It is  permissible for the Institution  acting in the capacity of ultimate purchaser  to appoint,  after taking  possession  of the subject-matter, the  manufacturer  as an agent  to  sell the  subject-matter   to  latter's customers  on  behalf of the  Institution.  This  agency is  permissible whether  it  is  carried  out free  of charge,  or for  consideration  either in the form of a fixed foe or a particular  percentage  of the sale price, on condition  that the contract  of agency and the contract  of Istisna'a were not entered  into in connection  with each other.

7. Parallel lstisna'a

7/1   It is   permissible   for  the  Institution  to  buy  items  on  the  basis  of a clear  and  unambiguous  specification   and  to  pay,  with  the  aim ct providing  liquidity  to the manufacturer,  the price in cash when the contract  is  concluded.  Subsequently,  the Institution   may enter
into  a contract  with  another  party  in order  to sell,  in the capacity of manufacturer  or  supplier,  items  whose  specification  conforms to the  wishes of that  other  party, on the basis of parallel  Istisna'a, and fulfil  its contractual  obligation  accordingly.  This is permissible on condition  that  the delivery date stipulated  in  the parallel  (sale)
contract  must  not precede  that  stipulated  in  the original  purchase contract,  and, moreover, the two contracts should  remain  separate from each other.  [see  item  3/1/4]

7/2  It is  permissible  for the  Institution,  acting  in  the  capacity  of the producer  or supplier, to conclude an Istisna'a contract with the aim of selling such items  to the customer  on a def 2rred  payment  basis,  and to enter  into a Parallel  Istisna'a contract  on  an immediate  payment basis with a manufacturer  or builder to acquire such items  as per the specifications in the first contract and sell them to the customer.  This



307





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel 1stisna'a

is  permissible  on  condition  that  the  two  contracts  should  remain separate  and,  moreover,  be  subject  to  the  matters  set  out  in item
3/1/4.

7/3  As a result  of concluding  an  Istisna'a  contract  in  the capacity  of a producer   or  supplier,  the Institution   must  assume  liability  for ownership risk and maintenance and insurance expenses prior to delivering the subject-matter to the ultimate purchaser ( the customer). Moreover,  the Institution  is not permitted,  in the Parallel Istisna'a contract  concluded  with the manufacturer,  to transfr  to the latter the risk arising from  its  obligations  towards the customer.

7/4 It is not permissible to make any contractual  link between the obligations  under  two  contracts  (the  contract  of Istisna'a and  the contract  of Parallel  Istisna'a)  when  they  are  concluded.  Therefore, it is  also not permissible  for a party to an ordinary  Istisna'a contract (I)  to  withdraw  his contractual  obligations  or delay delivering  the subject-matter  of the contract  because the obligation under  Parallel Istisna'a  did not take  place or (II)  to increase the price of the goods to  be  delivered  because  of an increase  in the cost of goods  in the
Parallel Istisna'a.  However,  there is  no restriction  on the right of the
Institution to stipulate  conditions and requirements  when concluding a Parallel lstisna'a contract as a purchaser, including a penalty clause similar to,  or different from,  that which the customer  has stipulated in the first Istisna'a contract  in which the Institution  is the supplier.
8. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued  en 29 Safar 1422  A.H., corresponding  to 23  May
2001  A.D.














308





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel 1stisna'a





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Standard  on Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a was adopted by the Shar'ah Board in its meeting No. (6)  held on 25-29  Safar 1422 A.H., corresponding to 19-23  May 200I A.D.

In its  meeting No.  (8)  held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 28 Safar  •
4 Rabf'  I 1423  A.H.,  corresponding to  11-16  May 2002  A.D.,  the Shari'ah
Board  readopted a resolution to reformat the Shari'ah rules for Istisna'a and
Parallel  Istisna'a in the form of a Shari'ah standard.






































309





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No.  (5) held  in Makkah Al-Mukarramah  on 8-12 Ramadan
1421  A.H. corresponding  to 4-8 December, 2000 A.D., the Shari'ah Board decided to give priority to the preparation of the a Shari'ah  rules for Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a.

On  Monday  11    Shawwal   1420  A.H. corresponding to  17  January  2000
A.D.,  the Fatwa and Arbitration  Committee recommended  to the Shari'ah Board  the commissioning  of a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic  study and an exposure draft on the Shari'ah  Rules for Istisna'a and Parallel  Istisna'a.

In its  meeting  held in Bahrain  on 21-23 Muharram  1421  A.H., corre• sponding  to 26-28 April 2000 A.D., the Fatwa and Arbitration Committee discussed the exposure  draft of  the Shari'ah Rules for Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a  and  asked  the  consultant  to  make  amendments  in light  of the comments  made by the members.
In its  meeting No.  (4)  held  in Abu Dhabi, United  Arab Emirates on  14
Sha'ban  1421  A.H. corresponding to  10 November  2000 A.D., the  Fatwa and Arbitration Committee discussed  the exposure  draft and made some relevant amendments.

The  revised exposure  draft  of  the  Shari'ah  Rules was  presented  to  the Shari'.ah   Board  in  its  meeting  No.   (5)  held  in  Makkah  Al-Mukarramah on 8-12  Ramadan  1421  A.H.  corresponding  to 4-8 December  2000 A.D. The  Shari'ah  Board  made  further  amendments   to  the  exposure  draft  of the  standard  and decided  that  it  should  be distributed  to specialists and interested  parties  to  obtain  their  comments  in  order  to  discuss  them  in a public hearing.



310





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel 1stisna'a

A public  hearing was held in Bahrain  on 4-5  Dhul-Hajjah   1421  A.H., corresponding  to 27-28 February 2001  A.D. The public hearing was attended by more than  thirty  participants  representing central  banks,  Institutions,
accounting firms,  Shari'ah  scholars,  academics and others who are interested in this field. Members of the Shari'ah Studies Committee  responded  to the written  comments that were sent prior to the public hearing as well as to the oral comments that were expressed in the public hearing.

The  Fatwa  and  Arbitration   Committee   held  its  meeting  No.   (5)  in
Bahrain  on  15  Dhul-Hajjah  1421  A.H.,  corresponding   to  10  March  2001
A.D.,  to  discuss  the  comments  made  about   the  exposure   draft    The committee  made  the necessary  amendments in light of both  the written comments that  were received  and  oral  comments  that  took  place in the public hearing.

The Shari'ah  Board  in its meeting No  (6)  held in Al-Madinah  Al-Mun• awwarah on 25-29  Safar  1422  A.H.,  corresponding  to 19-23  May 2001  A.D., discussed the amendments  made by the Fatwa and Arbitration  Committee, and made necessary amendments.  The standard  was adopted  in the name
of Shari'ah  Rules  for  Istisna'a  and Parallel  Istisna'a.  Some  paragraphs  were
adopted by the unanimous  vote of  the members of  the Sharf'ah  Board while the other paragraphs were adopted by the majority vote of the members,  as recorded in the minutes  of the Sharah  Board.

The  Shari'ah  Board  decided  in  its  meeting  No. (7)   held  in  Makkah Al-Mukarramah   on  9-13 Ramadan  1422  A.H.  corresponding   24-28 No• vember  200I   A.D.  to reformat  all  Shari'ah  rules in the  form of  standards and a committee was formed for this purpose.
In its  meeting No.  (8) held  in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah  on 28 Safar
- 4 Rab~' I  1423 A.H.  corresponding to 11-16 May 2002  A.D., the Sharf'ah Board  adopted  the reformatting  of the  Shari'ah  Rules for investment  and Financing No.  (4)  on Istisna'a  and Parallel  Istisna'a  in the name of Shari'ah Standard  No.  (11) on Istisna'a  and Parallel  Istisna'a  without any substantial
changes in the content.

The  Shari'ah  Standards  Review Committee   reviewed  the  standard  in its  meeting held  in Rab'  II 1433  A.H.  corresponding to March  2012  A.D.



311





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel 1stisna'a

in the State of Qatar, and proposed  after deliberation  a set of amendments (additions,  deletions,   and  rephrasing)   as  deemed   necessary,  and  then submitted  the proposed   amendments to the  Shari'ah  Board  for  approval as it deemed  necessary.

In its meeting  No.  (4)  held in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah,  Kingdom
of  Saudi   Arabia  on  27-29  Sha'ban   1436   A.H.   corresponding   to  14-16
June  2015  A.D.,  the  Sharf'ah  Board  discussed  the proposed  amendments submitted  by the Shari'ah  Standards Review Committee.  After deliberation, the Shari'.ah  Board  approved  necessary amendments,  and the standard  was
adopted  in its  current amended  version.









































312





Shan'ah  Standard  No. (11):  Istisna'a  and Parallel  1stisna'a





Appendix  (B)

The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Legitimacy of Istisna'a Contract

The legitimacy  ofIstisna'a  is based on the request of the Prophet  (peace be upon  him)  that  a pulpit  (a  platform)  for preaching  and  a finger ring be manufactured  for him.@  An Istisna'a contract  is  also permissible  on the basis  of the  principle  of Istihsan  (Shari'ah  approbation),   the general principles  of contracts and transactions  and the objectives of Shari'ah.  The Istisna'a  is a binding  contract  and not a mere promise.  The International Islamic Fiqh Academy has issued  a resolution  in support  of the legitimacy of Istisna'a.
Istisna'a Contract
■  The basis  for it  not being  permissible that  the  role of the Institution remain  as a mere financier  for a deal concluded  between the supplier and the ultimate  purchaser  is  that this would  lead  to involvement  in a Riba transaction  which makes the Istisna'a  contract a mere cover-up and not a real Istisna'a.
■  The basis  for stating that an Istisna'a contract  is  binding is  the view of Imam  Abu Yusuf,  as stated  in  the  "Majjalat Al-Ahkam  AI-'Adliyyah", (known  in  English   by the name the Mejelle),  that the manufacturer  has spent money in order to manufacture and to deliver according to speci• fication.  If the ultimate  purchaser has a right to refuse the manufactured goods,  then the manufacturer  will incur  losses.

(2)  The Hadith in which the Prophet  (peace be upon him)  requested the manufacture of finger ring has been related by  AI-Bukahri and  Muslim:  "Sahih Al-Bukhari"  [5:  220]; and  "Sahih  Muslim" [3:  1655]). The Hadith in which the Prophet  (peace be upon him) requested the manufacture of a pulpit for  preaching  has been related by Al-Bukhari in his Sahih" [2: 908].
(3)  International Islamic Fiqh Academy  Resolution   No. 65 (3/7).



313





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

The basis for the impermissibility of the manufacturer including a def ct exclusion clause in an Istisna'a  contract  is  that a valid Istisna'a is  a sale of specified goods to be delivered in the future and exclusion of liability as to defects is  valid only in the sale ct particular  identified  goods. This prohibition  of excluding liability  as to def cts  in Istisna'a   is one feature that makes it diffierent  from an ordinary sale.
The basis for the impermissibility of drawing  up Istisna'a contracts  or procedures in a way that appears to be a mere interest-based  financing is the need to avoid involvement  in a Riba transaction,  a potential  Riba or 'Inah sales.
Subject Matter of, and Guarantees in, an Istisna'a Contract
+  The basis for  the impermissibility  of concluding  an Istisna'a  contract for items  that  are not manufactured  a constructed  is  that items that are not the subject of transformation by manufacture  or construction by man,  that  is  natural  things  such  as animals,  fruits and vegetables, are not by definition  covered  by the term  Istisna'a which means a sale of materials  on condition  that they be subjected  to transformation by a manufacturing or construction  process.
• The basis for the permissibility of concluding an Istisna'a for manufac• tured  items  that either  have or do not have equivalents  in the market is  because  it is  normal  for  people  to  deal in these  kinds  of item.  As a principle, rules that are based on customary practice will change whe• never such  customary  practice  is cbanged. Therefore, any customary transaction  that is subject to specifications may be a subject-matter  of Istisna'a,  regardless of whether  it is  for use or consumption.
+  The basis for not allowing the subject-matter  of Istisna'a to be a specific
identified  item  is  that  an  Istisna'a  contract  involves  a  sale for  future delivery based on a specification.  Therefore,  if the items  to be sold  are specific  identified  items,  the  transaction  involves  selling  identified items  that  the  seller  does not own, which  is  prohibited  by the saying of the Prophet  (peace be upon  him):  "Do not sell what you  own nor

(4) The Hadith   has been  related  by A-Tirmidhi in his Sunan  "[3: 534], edited  by Ahmad
Shakir;  and AI-Albani, lrwad AL-Ghall" [5:  132].



314





Shan'ah  Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

Again,  items  to be manufactured  or constructed  do not yet exist and thus  cannot be specific and identified.  The  non-existent  item is to be produced  and delivered later and this constitutes a non-monetary obligation of the supplier.
The basis for the permissibility of a stipulation by the ultimate purchaser
that the manufacture  be  carried out by the Institution  itself is  because this  stipulation  does  affect the  purpose  of the  contract.  Rather,  this condition  is  relevant in this  contract  because the  ultimate  purchaser may be interested in the items that are produced by a particular supplier due  to  this  supplier's distinguished  competence  in manufacturing   or construction  and the quality cf the items  manufactured  or constructed by this  supplier.
+  The basis  for  the permissibility  of the manufacturer  presenting to  the
ultimate purchaser  either what he has produced  or what other parties have produced, ifthe ultimate purchaser did not stipulate to the contrary. is  because this  satisfies  the purpose  of the contract.  This  is  the  case because the  items are  being delivered according  to  the specifications that are laid  down in the contract.
• The basis for the permissibility of stipulating a time-period  during which manufacturer remains  liable for  any manufacturing  or  construction def ects  is  that such a stipulation  serves the purpose of the contract.  This is  because the ultimate  purchaser  warts  to  use the subject-matter  and this  is  not possible  unless the subject-matter  is  free from defects.
■  The basis for the requirement that the price be known  is  to remove any lack  of knowledge  and uncertainty  that may lead  to dispute.
• The  basis  for  the  permissibility  in  Istisna'a  of payment  on  def 2rred
terms or on an instalment  basis is  that labour (i.e. transformation and added value)   is an important part of the items  to be sold  and this makes the transaction  similar to a leasing  contract  in which  it is  permissible
for the rentals to be paid on a def zrred  or instalment  basis without this
being  considered  as  a sale of debt  for debt which  is  prohibited.  The same ruling applies to Istisna'a.

(5)  See:  "Majallat Al-Ahkam AI-Adliyya", article (158).



315





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

• The basis for the permissibility  of offering a difference  in the price for an Istisna'a contract  relating to  a difference  in the  date of delivery is that Istisna'a  is  analogous to an ljarah contract.  The fuqaha have stated that it  is  permissible  to give a labourer  in Ijarah  an option  regarding
wages depending  on whether  the worker finishes  the work in one day
or in two days.  The hirer  may say two  dinars if the worker  finishes  in one day or one dinar  if he finishes  in two  days.  Istisna'a is similar  to this.  There is a resolution  issued during  the Al Baraka Annual  Forum supporting  this ruling."
The basis for not allowing a contract  of Istisna'a  to be drawn up on the
basis   of a Murabahah  sale,  for example,  by  determining  the  price  of Istisna'a  on a cost- plus  basis,  is because the subject-matter  of Murabahah should be something  already in existence,  the cost  of which is  known and  which  is   owned  prior  to  the  conclusion   of a Murabahah   sale. An Istisna'a contract, on the other hand,  is concluded prior to ownership Of  the  subject-matter,  because (I)  it is   a sale based  on  a specification giving rise to a future  obligation,  and (II)  the actual cost will be known only after the completion  of the work,  and,  (III)  the price in a contract of Istisna'a  should  be known when the contract is  concluded.
• The  basis  for  deciding   that  the  Institution   is   not  obliged  to  give a discount  when  the actual costs  of the manufacture  are substantially greater  than  the  estimated  costs or  when  it  secures  a discount  from the manufacturer  is  because the Istisna'a contract  and Parallel  Istisna'a contract are independent  in terms of obligation and effects.  The Shari'ah Supervisory  Board  of the Kuwait Finance House has  issued  a Fatwa in this respect.
• The basis for the permissibility of the Institution  acquiring  all necessary
guarantees  is  that  these  guarantees  secure  its  rights and  this  request does affect the purpose  of a contract.
Changes  to an Istisna'a  Contract
■   The basis for the imperrnissibility  of extending  the date of payment  in return  for consideration  is  because that is  Riba.

(6)  See:  Resolution  No.  (13/7).
(7)  A1-Fatawa AI-Shar'iyyah FH  AL-Masa'il AHqtisadiyyah", Fatwa No.  (447).



316





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

The basis for the permissibility  of discounting  for unconditional  earlier payment is  the saying of the Prophet (peace be upon him) in the case of Ubay Ibn Ka'b  (may  Allah be pleased with him)  and his debtor:  "Write off a portion  of your debt"!" The International  Islamic Fiqh Academy has issued  a resolution in support  of this rule"9
■  The ultimate purchaser  (the  owner ct the land)  is not entitled to acquire
ownership ct incomplete  building structures  or utilities that are already in place without  giving consideration   to  the  builder  if the  builder  is unable to continue  to discharge  his obligation.  The basis  for this  is that the construction  was initiated by the builder at the request of the ultimate purchaser and such  a request is stronger than a mere permission  to build
on the latter's land.
The basis for the permissibility of a contract of Istisna'a including a clause that  the  manufacturer  is   not  liable  for extra expenses that  result  from additional  conditions  inserted into the  contract at a later  date  as a result of directives of the relevant  authorities, is because this condition is agreed upon by the parties  and does not affect the purpose of Istisna'a contract. The  Shari'ah   Supervisory  Board  ct Kuwait  Finance  House  has issued
a Fatwa in respect to this ruling.
The basis for the permissibility of a penalty dause in an Istisna'a contract is that such a clause  is  in the interest of the contract and because it is  laid down in respect to an obligation regarding items  that  must be produced and delivered in the future and not in respect to monetary  debt.
Supervision  of the Execution of an Istisna'a Contract
The basis for the permissibility  for the  Institution, when  acting  as the ultimate purchaser, to appoint a technically experienced  consulting firm and the permissibility  for the Institution, when  acting as the manufacturer, to appoint the ultimate  purchaser  as an agent is because agency is  permissible
and there  is  nothing  against  it  in  an Istisna'a  contract  provided  it  is  done with the agreement  of the parties.

(8)  The Hadith has been related by AI-Bukhari  in his "Sahih"   [1:  179]  and [2:  965].
(9)  International Islamic Figh Academy Resolution Na 64 (7/2)
(10)  See:  Fatwa No.  (251).



317





Shan'ah  Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

Delivery  and Disposal of the Subject-Matter
The  basis  for the  impermissibility of selling  the  items to  be  produced prior  to taking  either  actual or constructive possession  of them  is that such an action  is  considered  as selling a non-existent item.  It is  also considered as selling what one does not own because  it  is not available for the seller at the time of conclusion  of the contract.

Parallel Istisna'a
The basis for the permissibility of the Institution entering into a contract with another party  in order  to sell,  in the capacity of manufacturer, builder or supplier,  items whose specification conforms  to the wishes of that other party,  on the basis of Parallel  Istisna'a, is that  in such  a case there  are two separate deals of Istisna'a. There is no link between  the two contracts; hence, this is not an instance of two sales in one deal, which  is  impermissible.  The separation of the two contracts  also has the effect of making  the transaction a type of non-Riha-based financing.
































318





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Istisna'a Contract

Istisna'a is   a contract  of sale of specified  items to  be manufactured   or constructed,  with an obligation on the part of the manufacturer or builder (contractor)  to deliver them to the customer  upon completion.

Parallel Istaisna'a
Another  form  of Istisna'a,  known in modern  custom  as Parallel  Istisna'a al-Istisna  al-Muwazi", takes  effect through   two  separate  contracts.  In the  first  contract,  the  Islamic  Financial  Institution   acts  in  the  capacity of a manufacturer,  builder  or supplier  and concludes  a contract with the customer.  In the  second  contract,  the  Institution   acts  in the capacity  of a purchaser and concludes another contract with a manufacturer,  builder or supplier  in order to fulfil  its contractual  obligations towards the customer in the first contract. By this  process, a profit is realised through the difference in price between the two contracts and,  in most cases,  one of the two contracts is   concluded  immediately, (i.e.  the  Istisna'a  contract  entered  into with the manufacturer, builder or supplier), while the second contract (i.e. the contract entered into with the customer)  is  concluded later.

Difference Between  lstisna'a  and Ijarah
The contract  of Istisna'a  differs from the contract  of Ijarah   in the sense that the latter is  a contract  of services without  any commitment to supply materials  whereas  the  former  requires  that  the  manufacturer  or  builder provide  both  services  for the transformation or construction   process and ultimately to supply the materials in the form of the finished items.

Difference Between Istisna'a and a Standard  Construction Contract
The contract  of Istisna'a  also differs  from a standard construction  contract in that the latter is regarded as an ljarah contract if it is confined to providing



319





Sh ari' ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisa'a  and Parallel Istisna'a

services only,  with  the materials to be provided  by the customer  (the person who  engaged  the  Institution  to  carry out  the  construction  work).   But  if a construction contract requires  the builder  to provide both the services and the materials  needed  to fulfil  the contract, then  it is an Istisna'a contract.

Difference  Between Istisna'a and Salam

The Istisna'a contract  also differs  from  a Salam contract in the sense that the former  is  a contract that  involves a sale of specified  items that  have by nature to be manufactured or constructed. In other words, an lstisna'a contract is applicable  to materials  that  require transformation  by a manufacturing or construction process. 'The Salam, on the other  hand, is a contract  of sale of specified goods, the permissibility of which is not attached  to a condition  that the goods must be  manufactured or constructed.





































320






















Shari'ah  