Shari'ah Standard No.  (13)



Mudarabah

(Revised Standard)












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        370

I.  Scope of the Standard ..........s os.s o.so . s o .so.oso.so s. o.so . o.so s.s o.oo.. ....          370
2.  Definition d Mudarabah.........................................................................        370
3.  Agreement ofMudarabah  Financing....................................................        370
4.  Mudarabah Contract................................................................................        371
5.  Types d Mudarabah.................................................................................        '512
6.  Guarantees  in a Mudarabah Contract...................................................        '512
7.  Requirements Relating to the Capital....................................................        '512
8.  Rulings and Requirements Relating to Profit.......................................        373
9.  Duties and Powers of the Mudarib........................................................         375
IO.  Liquidation of a Mudarabah Contract...................................................        378
11.  Dated Issuance of the Standard.............................................................        378
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        379
Appendices
Appendix  (a):   Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard.............        380
Appendix  (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard....................................         382
Appendix  (c):   Definitions.............................................................................         389
















367








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE  ALL-MERCIFUL,  THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all his companions





Preface


The aim of this standard  is to explain the Sharf'ah rulings for  restricted and unrestricted Mudarabah, whether the Islamic financial Institution  (Institution/ Institutions)"is  acting in the capacity of a Mudarib  (entrepreneur)  or in  the capacity of an investor.































(I) The word (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer,  in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



369





Shan' ah Standard   No.  (13):  Mudarabah





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard covers Mudarabah  contracts between the Institution  and the other entities or individuals.  It also covers joint  investment  accounts and special purpose  investment  accounts  if these accounts  are administered on the basis of Mudarabah.

The standard  does not cover Sukuk  of Mudarabah  (Mudarabah  Certifi• cates)  or other types of partnership  contracts,  as these are covered by sep• arate standards.

2. Definition of Mudarabah

Mudarabah  is  a partnership  in profit whereby one party provides capital
(Rab  al-Mal) and the other party provides labour  (Mudarib).

3. Agreement  of Mudarabah Financing

3/1   It is  permissible,  on the basis of a general  framework   or a memo• randum  of understanding, to conclude  Mudarabah financing  con• tracts for a particular  sum of money and within a particular  defined duration  provided  that the memorandum of understanding will be later  implemented  in line with  specific  or  successive  Mudarabah transactions.

3/2  The memorandum of understanding should define the general con• tractual  framework,  indicating  the  intention   of the  parties  to  use either  unrestricted or  restricted  Mudarabah   financing  instrument, either through  revolving transactions  or separate transactions.  Also, the memorandum of understanding should indicate the profit ratio, and  type of guarantees  that  shall be presented  by the  Mudarib  to cover situations  of negligence, misconduct  or breach of contract  and other  relevant issues in this regard.



370





Shari' ah Standard No (13):  Mudarabah

3/3  If the Mudarabah contract  is  actually concluded  on the basis of the memorandum of understanding, the contents  of the memorandum become an integral part of any future contract, unless the parties  had originally agreed to exempt  themselves  from some of the obligations mentioned therein.

4. Mudarabah Contract

4/1  The  Mudarabah  contract  may be  concluded   using  terms  such  as
Mudarabah,  Qirad  or Mu'amalah.

4/2  Both  parties  should  possess the legal  capacity to appoint  agents and accept agency. Therefore, a Mudarabah contract may not be concluded in the absence cf two contracting parties with absolute legal  capacity or  of their  agents  who  enjoy  legal  capacity  similar  to  that  cf the contracting parties.

4/3  The general principle is  that a Mudarabah  contract  is  not binding, i.e. each ct the contracting  parties  may terminate  it unilaterally  except in two cases:

4/3/1  When  the  Mudarib  has already  commenced the  business,  in which  case the  Mudarabah  contract  becomes  binding  up  to the date of actual or constructive liquidation.

4/3/2 When the contracting parties agree to determine a duration  for which  the contract will remain  in operation.  In this case,  the contract  cannot  be  terminated prior  to the  end  of the  desig•
nated duration, except by mutual agreement  of the contracting
parties.

4/4  A Mudarabah contract  is one of the trust-based contracts. Therefore, the Mudarib  is investing Mudarabah capital on a trust basis in which case the  Mudarib   is  not  liable  for  losses  except  in case of breach of the  requirements of trust,  such  as misconduct  in  respect  to  the Mudarabah  fund,  negligence  and breach of the terms of Mudarabah contract.  In committing  any of these,  the  Mudarib  becomes  liable
for the amount of the Mudarabah  capital.



371





Shari'ah Standard No (13):  Mudarabah

5. Types of Mudarabah

Mudarabah contracts are divided into unrestricted and restricted Muda•
rabah.

5/1  An unrestricted Mudarabah contract is a contract in which the capital provider permits the Mudarib to administer a Mudarabah fund without any restrictions. In this case, the Mudarib has a wide range of  trade or business freedom on the basis of trust and the business expertise he has acquired.  An example of unrestricted Mudarabah is when the capital provider says, "Do business according to your expertise.  However, such  unrestricted business freedom in an unrestricted  Mudarabah must be exercised only in accordance with the interests of the parties and the objectives of the Mudarabah contract, which is  making profit. Therefore, the actions of the Mudarib must be in accordance with the business customs relating to the Mudarabah operations:  the subject matter of the contract.

5/2 A restricted Mudarabah  contract is  a contract in which the capital provider restricts the actions of the Mudarib to a particular location or to a particular type of investment as the capital provider considers appropriate, but not in a manner  that would unduly constrain the Mudarib in his operations.

6. Guarantees in a Mudarabah  Contract

The capital provider is permitted to obtain guarantees from the Mudarib that are adequate and enforceable.  This  is circumscribed by a condition that the capital provider will not enforce these guarantees except in cases of misconduct, negligence or breach of contract on the part of Mudarib.

7. Requirements Relating to the Capital

7/1  In principle,  the capital  of Mudarabah  must  be  provided  in the form of cash.  However,  it  may  be presented in the form of tangible assets,  in which case the value of the assets is  the contribution  to the Mudarabah  capital.  The valuation of the assets may be conducted by experts or as agreed upon by the contracting parties.



372





Shart'ah Standard  No.  (13):  Mudarabah

7/2  The capital of Mudarabah  should be clearly known to the contracting parties and defined in terms of quality and quantity in a manner  that eliminates  any possibility of uncertainty  or ambiguity.
7/3 It is  not permissible  to use a debt owed by the Mudarib  or another party to the capital provider  as capital in a Mudarabah contract.

7/4  For a Mudarabah   contract  to  be  valid  and  for  the  Mudarib  to  be considered  as  having  control  over the  capital,  the  capital  must  be, wholly or partially, put at the disposal of the Mudarib, or the Mudarib must have free access to the capital.

8. Rulings And Requirements  Relating to Profit

8/ 1    It is  a requirement that  the mechanism  for distributing  profit must be  clearly known  in a manner  that  eliminates  uncertainty and  any possibility of dispute.  The distribution of profit must be on the basis ct an agreed percentage  ct the profit and not on the basis of a lump sum  or a percentage  of the capital.

8/2  In principle,  it is  not permissible  to  earn  a share  of profit  in addi• tion  to a fe in a Mudarabah contract.  However,  it  is  permissible for the two parties  to construct a separate  agreement independent of the  Mudarabah  contract  assigning  one  party  to  perform,   for a fze, a business  activity  that  is not  by custom  part  of Mudarabah operations.  'The  independence of  this  separate  agreement  means that if the contract  of providing  this activity is terminated,  this will
not affect the contract of Mudarabah.

8/3 The parties shall agree on the  ratio of profit  distribution  when the contract  is  concluded.  It  is also permissible  for the parties to change the ratio of distribution  of profit at any time and to define the duration fer which the agreement will remain valid.
8/4   Ifthe  parties did not stipulate the ratio of profit distribution, then they shall  refer  to  customary   practice,  if any,  to  determine   the  shares of profit.  If the  customary  practice  is  that  the  profit  is  distributed equally,  then  this will be  applied  as such.  If there  is  no customary practice  in  this  regard,  the  Mudarabah  contract   is  regarded  void



373





Shari'ah Standard No (13):  Mudarabah

ab  initio,  and  the  party  who  acts  as the  Mudarib   should  receive a common market  price for the kind and amount of services  that he provided  as Mudarib.

8/5  If one of the parties stipulates  that  he should  receive  a lump  sum of money,  the  Mudarabah  contract shall  be void.  This  rule  does  not apply to a situation  where the parties agree that  if the profit  is  over a particular ceiling  then  one cl the  parties will take the  additional profit and if the profit is below or equal to the amount  of the ceiling the distribution of profit will be in accordance  with their agreement.

8/6 It is not permissible for the capital provider to give the Mudarib  two amounts  of capitals  on condition  that  the  profit  earned  on one  of the two amounts  would  be taken  by the  Mudarib  while the capital provider  would take the profit earned  on the other  amount.  It is  not also permissible  for the  capital  provider  to  state  that  the  profit  of one fi nancial period  would be taken  by the Mudarib  and the capital provider   would  take  the  profit  cf the  following  financial   period. Similarly, it is  not permissible  to assign the profit from  a particular transaction to the Mudarib  and the profit from  another  transaction to the capital provider.
8/7  No  profit  can  be  recognised   or  claimed  unless  the  capital  of the Mudarabah is maintained intact. Whenever a Mudarabah operation incurs  losses,  such losses  stand to be compensated  by the profits of future  operations   cf the  Mudarabah.  The  losses  brought   forward should  be  set against  the  future  profits.  All in all,  the  distribution af profit  depends   on the  final  result  of the  operations  at  the  time of liquidation of the Mudarabah contract.  If losses are greater  than profits  at the  time  of liquidation,  the  balance  (net  loss)  must  be deducted from the capital.  In this case, as he is a trustee  the Mudarib is  not liable for the amount  of this loss, unless there  is  negligence  or misconduct on his part.  If the total  Mudarabah expenses  are equal to the total Mudarabah revenues, the capital provider  will receive his capital back without  either profit  CI  loss,  and there will  be no profit in which  the  Mudarib   is  entitled  to  a share.  If profit  is   realised,  it must be distributed between  the parties  as  per the agreement.



374





Sharl'ah  Standard No (13):  Mudarabah

8/8  The Mudarib  is  entitled  to a share of profit as soon as it is clear that the operations  of the Mudarabah  have led to the realisation of a profit. However, this entitlement is  not absolute, as it is subject to the retention of interim profits for the protection  of the capital.  It will be an absolute right only after distribution, i.e. when actual or constructive valuations take place.  It is  permissible  to distribute  the realised profit among the parties  on account, in which case the distribution  will be revised when actual or constructive  valuation  takes place.  The final  distribution  of profit  should  be made based  on the selling price  of the Mudarabah assets,  which is  known as actual valuation.  It is  also permissible  that the profit be distributed  on the basis  cf constructive  valuation,  which is  valuation cf the assets on the basis cf fair value.  Receivables shall be measured  at the cash equivalent,  or net realisable value,  i.e.  after the deduction  of a provision fer doubtful debts. In  measuring  receivables, neither  time value  (interest  rate)  nor  discount  on current  value for extension  of period  of payment shall be taken into consideration.

8/9  If the Mudarib  has commingled his own funds with the Mudarabah funds,  the Mudarib  becomes  a partner in respect  of his funds  and a Mudarib  in respect  of the funds of the capital provider.  The profit earned on the two commingled funds will be divided proportionately
to the amounts  of the mo funds,  in which  case the Mudarib  takes
the profit  attributable to his own funds,  while the remaining profit is  to be distributed between  the Mudarib  and  the capital  provider according  to the provisions  of the Mudarabah contract.
9. Duties and Powers  cf the Mudarib

The Mudarib  should  employ his best efforts to accomplish  the objectives of the  Mudarabah  contract.  The  Mudarib   should   assure  the  capital provider  that  his money  is  in good  hands  that  will act to find  the best ways  of investing  it  in a permissible manner.

9/1  If a Mudarabah contract  is  concluded   on an unrestricted basis, the Mudarib  is permitted, in general, to do what entrepreneurs do in his field of activity, including  the following:



375





Shart'ah Standard  No.  (13):  Mudarabah

9/1/1  Attending  to all permissible  investment  or trading  fields that are  feasible,  given the  amount  of the  capital  at his disposal, and in which  he believes that his expertise,  and technical  and professional qualifications are likely to give  him the ability to compete effectively.

9/1/2  Carrying out the work himself or appointing another person to carry out some work if necessary, such as buying a commodity or marketing it for him.

9/1/3  Choosing as far as possible appropriate  places  and markets that are seemingly free of risks.

9/1/4 Safeguarding the Mudarabah  funds or depositing them  in the custody of a trustworthy  person whenever appropriate.

9/1/5  Selling  and buying on a deferred payment  basis.

9/1/6  The Mudarib  may do, either by permission or appointment  of
the capital provider,  the following:

a) The  Mudarib   may, at  any  time,  combine   a Mudarabah contract  and a partnership  (Sharikah)  contract, irrespective of whether  this takes place   at the outset of the contract  or after the commencement  of Mudarabah  operations, and of whether  the partnership  contribution  is  from  the Mudarib
himself or from  a third  party. The mixture of unrestricted
investment  deposits  with the Institutions'  funds is an exa•
mple of this kind of combination.

b) The  Mudarib   may  accept  funds  from  a  third   party  on a Mudarabah   basis if this new contract will not affect his investment  and  management   responsibility  in respect  of the first Mudarabah  contract.
9/2  It is permissible for the capital provider,  on the basis of his interests, to place restrictions on the actions  of the Mudarib. Thus,  Mudarabah operations may be restricted  to a specified time and place,  so that the Mudarib  may only  invest the Mudarabah  funds during  a particular
time period  or in  a specified country  or in  a market  of a particular



376





Shart'ah Standard  No.  (13):  Mudarabah

country.  In addition,  the  Mudarabah   operations   may be  restricted to investment  in certain  sectors  such as services or trade  sectors  or a single commodity or a group of commodities.  However, restricting the Mudarabah  operations  to certain  commodities is  circumscribed with a condition  that such commodities must be commonly  available so that,  other  things  being  equal,  the  restriction   will not  prevent the objectives of the Mudarabah  contract from being achieved.  For example,  the  commodities  to  which  the  Mudarabah   is  restricted
must  not be scarce,  seasonal  (and  out  of season)  or in  very.  limited
supply with  the consequence   that the objectives of the  Mudarabah contract  cannot  be achieved.

9/3  The capital provider  is  not permitted  to stipulate  that he has a right to  work  with  the  entrepreneur  (Mudarib)   and  to  be  involved   in
selling and  buying  activities,  or supplying  and  ordering.  However, the  Mudarib   should  refer  to  him  in  performing  any action  and should  not  act without  consulting  him.  Also,  the  capital  provider is  not entitled  to lay  down  conditions   that will restrict  movements or actions  of the  Mudarib,  such  as a stipulation  that  the  Mudarib must  enter  into  a  partnership with  others  or a stipulation  that  the Mudarib  must mix his  personal  funds  with the Mudarabah  funds.
9/4 The Mudarib  must  carry  out  all the work that  any similar  asset or fund  manager  would  be  liable,  by  custom,  to  do.  In this  case,  the Mudarib  is  not  entitled  to  a fe for  this  work  as this  is  part  of his
responsibilities.  If the Mudarib  appoints  another  party  on an Ijarah (hiring  contract)   basis  to  carry out  such  work,  the  wages for  the worker  must  be  paid from  the  personal  funds  of the  Mudarib  and
not from the Mudarabah   funds.  The Mudarib  may hire against the account of Mudarabah  funds  another  party,  at the prevailing  rate, to execute work that is not by custom the responsibility  of the Mudarib.

9/5  The Mudarib is not entitled to sell items for the Mudarabah  operation at  less  than the  common   or market  price,  or to  buy items  for  the Mudarabah  operation  at a price higher  than common  prices, unless ifsuch  action in either case is intended  to achieve an objective that is
obviously in the interest of the Mudarabah.



377





Shart'ah Standard No (13):  Mudarabah

9/6  It is  not  permissible for  the  Mudarib to  make  a loan  or  a gift or a charitable donation out  of the  Mudarabah funds.  Likewise,  the Mudarib is not  entitled to waive  a right  associated with  the  Mu• darabah operation unless  the  capital  provider has consented to his doing  so.

9/7  If the  Mudarib  has  a  right   to  receive  living  expenses  from  the Mudarabah  funds  that  has been  approved by the  capital  provider, then  he is entitled to the amount so approved for him.  If there  is  no agreement on this, then  the Mudarib should  take living expenses  in accordance with custom  and reason. The Mudarib is also entitled to
travelling expenses in accordance  with custom  and  reason.

10. Liquidation of a Mudarabah Contract

10/1  A Mudarabah contract can be liquidated in the following manner:

10/1/1  Being  a non-binding contract, it can be liquidated by uni• lateral  termination of the  contract by one  of the  parties. [see  item 4/3]

10/1/2  With  the agreement of both  parties.

10/1/3  On the date of  maturity if the two parties  had earlier agreed to set a time limit for it.  [see  item  3/4]

10/1/4  When the funds ofMudarabah contract  have been exhausted
or have suffered losses.

10/ 1/5  The death of the Mudarib or the liquidation of the institution that  acts as Mudarib.

10/2  On the  maturity of a Mudarabah operation,  the assets  should  be liquidated  in the manner explained  in item  8/8.
11. Date  of  Issuance of  the Standard

This Standard was issued on 4 Rabi' I,  1424 A.H.,  corresponding to 16
May 2002 A.D.







378





Shart' ah Standard  No  (13):  Mudara bah





Adoption of the Standard


The  Sharf'ah  Standard   on  Mudarabah   was  adopted   by  the  Shari'ah Board  in its  meeting  No.  (8)  held in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah   during the period  of 28  Safar to 4 Rabi' I,  1423  A.H.,  corresponding to 11-16  May
2002A.D.











































379





Shan'ah Standard No (13):  Mudarabah





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In  its  meeting  No.   (5)   held  in  Makkah  Al-Mukarramah  during  the period  of 8-12  Ramadan  1421  A.H.,  corresponding  to 4-8 December  200l A.D,,  the  Shari'ah   Board  decided  to  give priority  to  the  preparation   of a Shari'ah  Standard  on Mudarabah.

On Saturday 15 Dhul-Hajjah  1421 A.H., corresponding to 10 March 2001
A.D., the Fatwa and Arbitration Committee  recommended to the Shari'ah Board  the  commissioning  of a Shari'ah  consultant   to  prepare  a juristic study and an exposure  draft on the Shari'ah Standard  for Mudarabah.

In  its   meeting  held  on  18   Muharram    1422  A.H.,   corresponding  to
12   April  2001   A.D.,   the  Fatwa  and  Arbitration   Committee   discussed the  exposure  draft  of the  Shari'ah  Rules for  Mudarabah   and  asked  the consultant  to  make  amendments   in light  of the  comments  made  by  the members.  The Committee  also held a meeting on 20  Jumada II,  1422  A.H., corresponding to 8 December  2001  A.D., and made some amend!ments in light of the comments  made by the members.

The revised exposure draft of the Standard  was presented  to the Shari'.ah Board  in  its  7th  meeting  held  in  Makkah  Al-Mukarramah  during   the period  of 9-13  Ramadan   1422  A.H.,  corresponding  to  24-28  November
2001  A.D. The Shari'ah Board made  further  amendments to the exposure draft of the Standard  and decided that it should be distributed  to specialists and interested  parties  in order to obtain their comments  with the objective of discussing them  in  a public hearing.

A public hearing  was held in Bahrain  during  the period  of 29-20 Dhul•
Hajj ah  1422  A.H.,  corresponding  to  2-3  February  2002  A.D. The public



380





Shart'ah Standard No (13):  Mudarabah

hearing was attended  by more than  thirty participants  representing central Institutions,  Institutions,  accounting   firms,  Shari'ah  scholars,  academics and  others  who  are interested  in this  field.  Some  of the  members  of  the Shari'ah  Board  responded  to the written  comments  that were sent prior  to the public hearing  as well as to the oral comments  that were expressed  in the public hearing.

The Shari'ah  Standards  Committee  in its meeting held during the period of 21-22  Dhul-Hajjah   1422  A.H.,  corresponding  to 6-7 March  2002 A.D, in the Kingdom  of Bahrain discussed  the comments  made on the exposure draft. The Committee  made the amendments which it considered necessary in light  of both  the discussions  that had taken  place in the public hearing and the written  comments  that had been received.
The Shari'ah Board in its 8th meeting held on 28 Safar-4 Rabi' I, 1423 A.H., corresponding to  11-16 May 2002 A.D, in Al-Madinah   Al-Munawwarah discussed  the  amendments  made  by  the  Shari'ah  Standards  Committee, and made  the necessary  amendments,  which  it  deemed  necessary.  Some paragraphs   of the  standard   were  adopted  by  the unanimous  vote of the members  of the Sharf'ah  Board,  while the other  paragraphs  were adopted by  the  majority  vote of the  members,  as recorded  in the  minutes  of the Shari'ah  Board.

The Shari'ah Standards Review Committee  reviewed the Standard in its meeting  held on Rabr'  II,  1433  A.H.,  corresponding to March  2012  A.D., in the State of Qatar, and proposed  after deliberation  a set  of amendments (additions,  deletions,  and   rephrasing)   as   deemed   necessary,  and  then submitted  the proposed  amendments to the Shari'ah  Board for approval as it deemed  necessary.

In its 41st meeting  held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah, Kingdom  of Saudi Arabia during  the period  of27-29 Sha'ban  1436 A.H., corresponding to  14-16   June   2015   A.D.,   the  Shari'ah   Board  discussed   the  proposed
amendments  submitted   by  the  Shari'.ah   Standards  Review  Committee.
After  deliberation,  the Shari'ah  Board  approved  necessary  amendments, and the Standard  was adopted  in  its  current amended  version.



381





Shan'ah Standard No (13): Mudarabah





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Permissibility  of Mudarabah and Its Rationale
Mudarabah,  known also as Qirad,  is  a contract  that arranges cooperation in business investment between capital on one hand and entrepreneurship on the other,  whereby the contracting parties jointly and commonly own the realised profit as per the agreement.  The party  providing the capital is   known  Rab al-Mal  and  the  investor  is   known  as Mudarib  or  'Amil (literally.  worker) or Muqarid.
Mudarabah contract  derives its permissibility from  the following:
a)  From  the  Qur'an  is  the Saying  of Allah,  the Almighty:  {"Others travelling through the land, seeking of Allah's  bounty}."  This verse is   interpreted  to mean  those  who  travel  for the  purpose   of trading and  seeking  permissible   income  in order  to provide  for themselves and their family.
b) From  the  Sunnah   is   the  Hadith   that  says,   "AI-'Abbas   Ibn  Abdul•
Muttalib  used  to pay money  for  Mudarabah   and  to stipulate  to  the Mudarib  that  he  should  not travel by sea, pass by valleys or trade  in livestock,  and  that  the  Mudarib  would  be liable for  any  losses  if he did so.  These  conditions  were brought  before  the Prophet  (peace be upon  him)  and  he approved  them?"  Among  the  Hadiths  regarding
the permissibility of Mudarabah  is  the case that states that "Umar Ibn

(2)  AI-Marghinani,  AlHidayah  Sharh Bidayat Al-Mubtad£" [3:  202];  Al-Kasani, "Bada'f' Al-Sana i" [6:   56 and 57]  Ibn  Rushd,  Bidayat  Al-Mujtahid"  [2:   236];  and bn Qudamah, Al-Maughn£" [3:  26].
(3)  "Takmtlat Al-Majmw" [14:  357-360];  "Subul Al- Salam" [3:  76];  "Bidayat Al-Mujtahid"°
[2:  236]  41-Hdayah"  [2:  202];   "AL-Maughnr  [5:  26]  and  41-Muhadhdhab"  Printed
with  41-Majm" [14:  357].
(4)  [A!-Muzzammil (The One Wrapped in Garments): 20]
(5)  The Hadith  has been related by Al-Bayhaqi  6:  111].



382





Shari' ah Standard  No (13): Mudarabah

Al-Khattab  gave one  man  the funds  belonging  to  an orphan  for the purpose  of Mudarabah  and the man was  trading  with these funds  in Iraq"."
c)   Ibn Al-Mundhir mentioned that there is generally  consensus  among the scholars in respect to the permissibility of a Mudarabah contract."
• The   rationale  for   making   this   contract  permissible  includes   the following:
a) Money  cannot   increase  unless  it  is   associated  with  work.  It is also not permissible to provide  money in return  for a periodic  pre-agreed payment   (rent)  to  a person   who  is  willing  to  invest  it  as this  will constitute a debt with Riba.
b) The Mudarabah contract  is  made permissible to facilitate investment cooperation between capital providers  who are not prepared to invest and manage their money themselves, and competent business or investment experts who lack adequate  capital.  In other  words,  there
are some  individuals who  are rich  but lack business  or investment
know-how and  others  who  have  business  or investment  expertise but  lack  money.  This  situation  thus  calls for  the  permissibility  of the  Mudarabah contract so as to combine  the  interests  of the  two parties.""

Moreover,  a Mudarabah contract  is  an instrument that was commonly used in trade  and which usage expanded  in modern  times to include  busi• ness,  services,  and agricultural  or horticultural and industrial activities.
a) The business philosophy of conventional ban.ks depends on the concept of renting  out  money  and  making  profit  in doing  so,  while   Shari'ah prohibits  this  philosophy  because  of its  being  Riha.  The  Mudarabah financing instrument  has been an essential instrument  to develop Islamic financial Institutions (Institution/Institutions). This instrument is used by  these  institutions  to  attract  unrestricted   or restricted  investment accounts and to reinvest these funds in various activities.

(6)  The Hadith  has been related by AI-Bayhaqi in A/-Marfah (see: Al-Zayla'i,  "Nash Al•
Rayah').
(7)  "AI-Maughn"  [7:  133-134].
(8)  "Takmtlat  Al-Majmu"  [14:  371].



383





Shart'ah Standard  No.  (13): Mudarabah

Contract of Mudarabah
The basis for  the rule that both  parties  to a Mudarabah  contract  must be legally  capable to appoint,  or act as,  an agent is because each party acts as an agent of the other party  and appoints  the other  party  to act on his behalf. The entitlement  to appoint or act as an agent entitles one to conclude  a Mudarabah  contract.
■  The basis for regarding  a Mudarabah   contract  initially as a non-bin• ding contract  is  that the Mudarib  is  using the capital provider's  funds with his consent  in a contractual  relationship  in which the Mudarib  is just  an agent,  and an agency contract  is  not binding.
■  The basis for making a Mudarabah  contract  binding  once the work has
commenced  is  that a unilateral  termination of the contract  at this  stage might  frustrate  the objective of the  parties  to make  profit  and might cause damage to the Mudarib  since he might  not receive any compen• sation for his work.
■  The basis  for allowing a time  limit for the operation  <fa Mudarabah
contract  is that a Mudarabah  contract is, in essence, an agency contract, which  is   subject  to  a designated  duration"  The  International  Fiqh Academy has issued a resolution  in this respect.
The basis for considering  the Mudarib  as a trustee  with respect to the
Mudarabah  funds is  that the Mudarib  is using another  person's money with his consent,  and  the  Mudarib  and  the  owner  of the  funds  share the benefits from the use of the funds.  In principle, a trustee  should not be held liable for losses sustained by the funds.  Rather, the risks of such losses must be borne by the Mudarabah  funds.
Guarantees in a Mudarabah Contract
■  The basis for allowing guarantees  in a Mudarabah  that would be used in  case of misconduct  and  negligence  of the  Mudarib  is  that  in such a case the  Mudarib  then  becomes  liable for losses  and  must  bear the consequences  of these actions.{

(9)  41-Mughr" [7:  133-134].
(10}  ResolutionNo.122  [5:  13]
(11)  This  is the opinion of the Shari'ah Board of Al Rajhi  Company, see Al-Mudhakkirah
Al- Tafsiriyya. I is also endorsed  in the First Al Baraka Forum.



384





Shan'ah Standard  No  (13):  Mudarabah

Requirements  Relating to the Capital
• The basis for  it  being  permissible that  the  capital  of Mudarabah  may be constituted  by the  value of tangible  assets contributed  is  that  the objective of Mudarabah is to make profit. This objective can be realised whether  the capital is contributed in the form of tangible assets or cash. This  rule is based on the view of the Maliki and the Hanbali jurists.3
■  The basis for the requirement that the capital of Mudarabah   should be
clearly known  and should  be defined  in terms  of quality and quantity in a manner  that eliminates  any possibility of uncertainty or ambiguity is  because  recognition   of profit  is  dependent  on the  recovery  of the capital on the date of liquidation.  However,  recovery of the capital  can• not be ascertained if its  amount  was not known earlier, and this lack of
knowledge  may potentially  lead  to a dispute.
• The basis for not allowing  a debt  owed by the Mudarib to the capital provider be contributed ascapital in a Mudarabah contract is because, as  a  principle,  Mudarabah  capital   must   be  (at  the  conclusion  of a Mudarabah contract)  an asset that  is  available  and cannot be used
on the  spot  for the Mudarabah operations. A debt  fails to meet  this requirement,  as it is  a receivable  that  is  not  available  for  use when the  contract is  concluded.  Moreover,  considering a debt  as capital of Mudarabah involves  potential Riba. This  is  because  the  creditor may be suspected  of having  extended the debt  tenure  in order  to get additional consideration (for the extension) from  the debtor  under
the name  ofMudarabah.
■  The basis for the  requirement that  the Mudarabah  operation   is  valid only if the capital is presented  to the Mudarib  is because the Mudarib  is the manager  ct the Mudarabah  operation,  and the trustworthy trustee for the Mudarabah   capital and  income.  Therefore,  it  is  necessary  that the capital  be fully released  to the  Mudarib  so that  he will be able  to
protect and invest the capital and achieve the objective of the Mudarabah
contract.

(12)  "Hashiyat AL-Dusual [3:  517];  and  Al-Maughn"" [5:  17]. (13)  AL-Hidayah" [3:  203]  and "Hashiyat AI-Dusuqt"  [3:  517].



385





Shart'ah Standard  No.  (13):  Mudarabah

Rules and Requirements Relating  to Profit
• The basis for the requirement  that the profit ratio is  known  is  because profit  is   the  subject  matter  of a Mudarabah   contract  and  a lack  of knowledge as to the subject matter  renders a contract  void.
The  basis for  the  requirement that  the  profit  share of each  party be
a percentage  of the profit and not a lump  sum is  because a Mudarabah contract  is  a form  of partnership for sharing profit.  Any condition  that allocates a lump  sum  to  one party  would  not  be consistent  with  the sharing  of profit.  This  is  because  the  Mudarabah   operation  may not realise a profit other than the lump sum which goes to one party, thus excluding the other party from partnership in profit.
■  The basis for the impermissibility of simultaneously  receiving a share of profit and a fee  for  managing  a Mudarabah   is  likewise that the fee is  provided  in the form of a lump  sum  and the Mudarabah  operation may not realise a profit other  than  the lump  sum,  thus precluding  the sharing of profit.
The basis for the permissibility  of an agreement  to change the ratio of profit distribution  at any time is  that the profit is  a right belonging  to the parties  and  an agreement  in the  manner  described  does not lead to a prohibited  act, such  as preclusion of sharing in profit. Rather, the agreement  makes the parties  partners  in profit.
■  The  basis  for  nullifying  a  Mudarabah   contract   when  the  contract is  silent on  the  ratio of profit distribution   and there  is   no customary practice according  to which the profit is  to be distributed  to each party is  that the subject matter of a Mudarabah  contract  is  profit. The lack of knowledge as  to the subject matter nullifies contracts.
■  The  basis for  nullifying  a Mudarabah  contract   when  one  party  sti• pulates  entitlement to a lump sum is because  a Mudarabah is  about sharing  profit  and this form  of condition precludes  sharing  of profit and  may potentially lead  to one party  being wrongfully  deprived of his rights.

(14)  See:  AI Baraka's  1I  Forum,  Fatwa No.  (8); AI Baraka's 4 Forum,  Fatwa  No.  (5). This is also  seconded   by the  Fatwa  of the  Sharf'ah  Board  of Faisal  Islamic   Bank, Sudan (P.   107),  which   was  published in  "Dall Al-Fatawa  Al-Shar'iyyah F AI-Amal Al Masr afiyya,  Islamic  Economic  Centre,  International  Islamic  Bank, (P.  53).



386





Shari'ah Standard  No  (13):  Mudarabah

The basis for not  allowing an agreement that  the Mudarib  be entitled to the profit earned on one of two capital funds,  while the profit earned on the other  capital fund  belongs  to the capital provider,  is that such an agreement  may preclude  the sharing  of profit and  may potentially lead  to one party being wrongfully deprived  of his rights.
The  basis  for  stating  that  profit  is  not  realised  unless  the  capital  is
recovered or maintained intact is the Hadith in which the Prophet (peace be  upon  him)  said:   "The  instance  of a Musali  (a person who performs prayer)  is that of a businessperson  who  will not secure profit unless  the capital  is  secured.    Likewise,  a supererogatory prayer  is  not  acceptable
unless  the  obligatory prayer  is  performed.U   This Hadith  shows  that distribution  of profit  prior  to  recovery  of the  capital,  or  unless  the capital is  maintained  intact, is  invalid. Moreover, profit is  an addition  to the capital and such an addition  cannot be recognised or realised unless the capital that is  the source of the profit is  maintained.
■  The basis for the requirement that the Mudarib  is  preliminarily  entit• led to a profit when realised, i.e. prior to distribution (an encumbrance right), and that the net profit earned will be known absolutely only after allocation through  actual or constructive valuation, is  analogous to the contract  of sharecropping.  The Mecca based Islamic Fiqh Academy has issued  a resolution  in support of constructive  valuation. G
Duties  and Powers ct the Mudarib
The basis for allowing the Mudarib freedom of action in an unrestricted Mudarabah  is  that the Mudarib  has the aim of achieving the objective of the capital provider,  which is  making  profit,  and this  is  not possible unless the capital is vigorously put into operation.
• The basis  for not  allowing the capital  provider  to stipulate  a right  to work with the entrepreneur  (Mudarib)  or to be involved  in acts relating to Mudarabah  operations  is  because  such a stipulation  would  curtail

(15)  The Hadith has been related by Al-Bayhaqi in his Sunan,  and was narrated  by Ali bn Abu Talib. Al-Bayhaqi stated that there is a weak narrator  in the chain of transmission of this Hadith,  Al-Maws'ah Al-Fiqhiyyah" [38:  74].
(16)  Resolution  No. (4) of the Islamic Fiqgh Academy under the auspices of  Muslim World
League issued in the sixth session that was held in Mecca. This is also the view that  was endorsed  by Al Baraka's 8 Forum, Fatwa No. (2).



387





Shart'ah Standard  No.  (13):  Mudarabah

the  freedom  of the  Mudarib,  limit the  investment  scope  and  hinder the Mudarib in achieving the objective of the Mudarabah contract,  i.e. making profit.
• The basis for not allowing the Mudarib to make a loan,  gift or charitable
donation  from  the Mudarabah  fund is  because these  actions  do not benefit the Mudarabah  operation, rather, they involve  potential  lass to the capital  provider.
• The basis  for  allowing the Mudarib,  when acting in the interest of the
Mudarabah and in the event that the parties did not specify an amount of money for expenses, to obtain personal expenses from the Mudarabah funds as per customary  practice   is because what is  known  by custom is  deemed  to  apply   as  a condition  even if the  parties did  not  clearly stipulate it. Again, the permission  for the Mudarib to obtain  common personal expenses in these cases is  granted by custom.
Liquidation  of Mudarabah Contract
• The basis for allowing liquidation  of a Mudarabah   contract  unilate• rally or by agreement  of the parties  or at the maturity  date is  because a Mudarabah  contract  is   non-binding   if the parties  did  not stipulate
a term for its  maturity.
The basis  for allowing constructive  valuation  is  because Shari'ah  has endorsed  the concept of valuation.  In addition,  this is  allowed because it is  a valid tool that passes rights to owners appropriately. The actual valuation of assets for distribution  is based on a common  sense because this is  the principle.
The  basis  for allowing  a Mudarabah   contract  be terminated   on  the grounds  of loss of capital  is  that  when  the capital  has  been lost, the Mudarib is  not able  to put it to work in a business,  and that the fund that was assigned  for the Mudarabah  is no longer in existence, thus entailing  the termination of the Mudarabah contract.
The basis for allowing termination  of a Mudarabah  contract  due to the
death of the Mudarib is that a Mudarabah contract is similar to contract of agency Or,  at least, it includes agency and an agency contract  is  ter• minable  by the death of the agent.



388





Shan'ah Standard No.  (13):  Mudarabah





Appendix (C)
Definitions


Sharikah

Sharikah  is an agreement  between  two or more  parties  to merge  their assets or to combine  their services,  obligations  and liabilities with the aim of making  profit.

A Mudarabah contract is distinguished from a Sharikah  (Musharakah)
contract  in the following  respects:

a) The basis for earning a share of profit in Sharikah  is the required capital contribution  of all parties, whether  in the form of cash, commodities, services or liability in the case ct reputation  partnership and that the subject of the contract  is  based on a single element,  i.e.  capital.  The basis for earning  a profit  in a Mudarabah, on the other  hand, comes from  two elements:  the  first element  is  the existence  of capital  that is  subject  to,  and  similar  to, the  conditions   of Sharikah  capital;  the second  element  is  the  work  done  by  the  Mudarib  that  is  different from  the capital of the venture.
b) In Sharikah,  the work,  as a general  rule,  is  to be done jointly  by the parties,  whereas  in Mudarabah it  is  the Mudarib  who works.


















389


























Shari'ah  