Shari'ah Standard No.  (17)



Investment  Sukuk












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        468
I.  Scope of the Standard ............so.sos.sos.sos.sso.sos.so.sos.sos.so........      468
2.  Definition of Investment Sukuk ........so.sos.sass.sos..so..so..so.so.......      468
3.  Types of Investment Sukuk:       , .....••........... ,                                  ,.......................       468
4.  Characteristics of Investment Sukuk ........sos.sos.sos.so.sass.sos..      47L
5. Sharf'ah   Rulings arxl Regulations...........................................................        472
6.  Date d Issuance of the Standard............................................................        481
Adoption of the Standard.............as...s.....sos...s....so..............        482

Appendices
Appendix  (a):   Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard.............        483
Appendix  (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard.....................................        485
Appendix  (c):   Definitions..............................................................................        487

























465








IN  THE NAME OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all his companions





Preface


The aim of this  standard  is to elaborate the Shari'ah  rules for  the issuance and  trading  of investment Sukuk  (certificates)  as well as the elaboration  cf their  types,  characteristics,  Shari'ah  regulations  and the  conditions for  the issuance of Sukuk and dealings in them for trading by Islamic financial insti• tutions  (institution/institutions).






























(1) The word  (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic  financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



467





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk





Statement of the Standard


1.  Scope of the Standard

This  standard  covers investment  Sukuk. These Sukuk  include Sukuk of ownership  of leased  assets,  ownership  of usufructs,  ownership  of ser• vices, Murabahah, Salam, Istisna'a, Mudarabah,  Musharakah, investment agency and sharecropping (Muzaraah), irrigation  (Musaqat) and agricul• tural (Mugharasah) partnerships.  The standard  does not cover shares of joint  stock companies,  certificates of funds and investment  portfolios.

2. Definition of Investment Sukuk

Investment  Sukuk are certificates cf equal value representing  undivided shares  in ownership  of tangible  assets, usufruct  and  services or (in  the ownership   of)  the  assets  of particular   projects  or  special  investment activity, however, this is  true  after receipt of the value of the Sukuk, the closing  of subscription   and  the  employment  of funds  received  for the purpose  for which the Sukuk  were issued.
In this  standard,  Sukuk  have been  designated  as  Investment  Sukuk  in order to distinguish  them  from shares  and bonds.

3. Types of Investment Sukuk

Investment  Sukuk  are of different types, and among these are:

3/1   Certificates of ownership in leased  assets

These  are certificates  of equal value  issued  either  by the  owner  of a leased  asset or  a  tangible  asset to  be leased  by promise,  or they are issued by a financial  intermediary acting on behalf of the owner with  the  aim of selling the  asset and  recovering  its  value through subscription  so that the holders of the certificates become owners of the assets.



468





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk

3/2  Certificates of ownership  of usufructs

3/2/1  Certificates  of ownership  of usufructs  of existing assets

These are two types:

3/2/1/1  Certificates   of equal  value  issued  by the  owner  of an existing asset either on his own or through  a finan• cial intermediary:, with the aim ct leasing the asset and receiving the rental  from the  revenue  of subscription so that the usufruct  of the assets passes into the own• ership of the holders of the certificates.
3/2/1/2 Certificates  of equal value issued  by the owner of the usufruct  ct an existing asset (lessee),  either on his own or  through  a  financial  intermediary,  with  the aim  ct subleasing the  usufruct  and  receiving the rental  from the revenue of the subscription so that the holders of the certificates become owners of the usufruct  of the asset.

3/2/2 Certificates of ownership of usufructs of described future assets

These are certificates  of equal value issued for the purpose  of leasing out tangible  future  assets and for collecting the rental from  the  subscription   revenue  so  that  the  usufruct  of the described future asset passes into the ownership  of the holders of the certificates.

3/2/3  Certificates  of ownership  of services of a specified party

These  are  certificates  of equal  value  issued  for the  purpose of providing  services  through   a specified  provider  (such  as educational  benefits in a nominated university) and obtaining the service charges in the form of subscription  income so that the holders of the certificates become owners of these services.

3/2/4  Certificates of ownership  of described  future services

These are certificates  of equal value issued for the purpose  of providing  future  services  through   described  provider   (such as educational  benefits  from  a university  without  naming  the
educational  institution)   and  obtaining  the  fee  in the form  of



469





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk

subscription   income  so  that  the  holders   of the  certificates become owners of the services.

3/3  Salam certificates (Salam Sukuk)

These  are  certificates   of  equal  value  issued  for  the  purpose   of mobilising  Salam  capital  so that  the goods  to be  delivered  on the basis of Salam  come to be owned by the certificate holders.

3/4 Istisna'a certificates  (Istisna'a Sulruk)

These are certificates of equal value issued with the aim of mobilising funds to be employed for the production  of goods so that the goods produced  come to be owned by the certificate holders.

3/5  Murabahah certificates (Murabahah Sulruk)

These  are  certificates  of  equal  value  issued  for  the  purpose   of financing  the  purchase  of goods  through  Murabahah   so  that  the certificate holders become the owners of the Murabahah  commodity.

3/6 Musharakah certificates (Musharakah Sulruk)

These  are certificates  of equal value issued  with  the  aim  of using the  mobilised   funds  for  establishing   a  new  project,   developing an existing  project  or financing  a business  activity  on the  basis of any of partnership   contracts  so that the certificate  holders  become the  owners  of the project  or the  assets of the  activity as per  their respective shares,  with  the Musharakah  certificates  being managed on the basis of participation  or Mudarabah  or an investment  agency.

3/6/1  Participation  certificates

These are certificates representing projects or activities managed on the basis of Musharakah by appointing one of the partners or another person to manage the operation.

3/6/2  Mudarabah  Sukuk

These are  certificates that represent projects or activities man• aged  on the basis  f Mudarabah  by appointing one of the part• ners  or another person as the Mudarib for  the management of
the operation.



470





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk

3/6/2  Investment  agency Sukuk

These  are  certificates   that  represent   projects   or  activities managed  on the basis of an investment  agency by appointing an agent to manage  the operation  on behalf ct the certificate holders.

3/7  Sharecropping certificates  (Muzara'ah  Sulruk)

These are certificates of equal value issued for  the purpose  of using the funds mobilised through  subscription  for financing  a project on the basis of Muzara'ah so that the certificate holders become entitled to a share  in the crap according to the terms ct the agreement.

3/8  Irrigation  certificates (Musaqat  Sukuk)

These  are  certificates  of  equal  value  issued  for  the purpose   ct employing   the   funds   mobilised   through   subscription   for  the irrigation  of fruit bearing trees, spending  on them  and  caring  for them  on  the  basis  ct a Musaqat  contract  so  that  the  certificate holders  become  entitled  to a share in the crop as per agreement.

3/9 Agricultural  certificates  (Mugharasah  Sukuk)

These are certificates of equal value issued on the basis of a Mugharasah contract for the purpose of employing the funds for planting trees and undertaking  the work and expenses required  by  such plantation  so that the certificate holders become entitled to a share in the land  and the plantation.

4. Characteristics of Investment Sukuk

4/1   Investment  Sukuk are certificates ct equal value issued  in the name ct the owner or bearer in order to establish the claim of the certificate owner over the financial  rights  and  obligations  represented  by the certificate.
4/2  Investment  Sukuk  represent  a common  share in the ownership  of the  assets  made  available for investment,  whether  these  are  non• monetary  assets,  usufructs,  services  or a mixture  of all these  plus intangible  rights,  debts  and  monetary   assets.  These  Sukuk do  not represent  a debt owed to the issuer  by the certificate holder.



471





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment Sukuk

4/3  Investment  Sukuk are  issued  on the  basis of a Shari ah-nominated contract  in accordance  with  the  rules  of Sharf'ah  that  govern  their issuance  and trading.

4/4 The trading  of Investment  Sukuk  is subject to the terms that govern trading  of the rights they represent.

4/5 The  owners  of these  certificates  share  the  return  as stated  in  the subscription   prospectus   and  bear  the  losses in  proportion  to  the certificates owned (held) by them.
5. Shari'ah Rulings  and Regulations

5/1   Issuance  of investment Sukuk

5/1/1  It is permissible  to issue  investment  certificates by way of sub• scription on the basis of any of Shari'ah-nominated investment contract.

5/1/2  It is permissible to issue certificates for (to securitize) assets that are tangible assets,  usufructs and services by dividing them into equal shares and issuing certificates for their value. As for debts owed as a liability,  it is  not permissible to securitize them fer the purpose  of trading.
5/1/3  The issue  contract  has all the legal  effects of the contract  upon which the issued certificates are based. This occurs after closing of the subscription  and the allotment  of the certificates.
5/1/4 The  two parties  of the  issue  contract  are the issuer  and  the subscribers.

5/1/5  The relationship  between the two parties  to the issue  contract is  determined on the basis of the type of contract  and its status in the Shari'ah  as well  as the following description:

5/1/5/1  Certificates  of ownership  of leased assets

The issuer  of these certificates is seller of a leased  asset or an  asset to  be leased  on promise,  the  subscribers are the buyers of the asset,  while the funds  mobilised



472





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk

through  the subscription  are the purchase  price of the asset.  'The   certificate  holders  jointly  own the  assets through  an  undivided  ownership  sharing  the  profits and  losses  on  the  basis  of the partnership   that  exists between them.

5//5/2Certificates  of ownership  of usufructs
a)    Certificates cf ownership of the usufruct of exis•
ting assets

The issuer of these certificates is the seller of usufruct of  an  existing asset,  the  subscribers  are buyers of such usufruct,  while the funds  mobilised  through subscription  are the purchase price of the usufruct. The certificate holders become joint  owners of the usufruct  sharing  its benefits  and risks.
b)   Certificates  of ownership   of described   usufruct to be made available in the future
The issuer of these certificates is the seller of usufruct cf an asset to be made available  in the future as per specification.  The  subscribers   are  buyers  of the usufruct through, the funds mobilised through subscription  are the purchase price of the usufruct. The certificate holders become joint owners of the undivided  usufruct  sharing  its benefits and risks.
c)    Certificates  cf ownership of services

The  issuer of these certificates is the  seller of ser• vices,  the  subscribers  are  buyers  of the  services, while  the  funds  mobilised  through   subscription are the purchase price cf the services.
The certificate holders are entitled to sell the profits cf all the types that are listed at (a),  (b)  and (c)  and are entitled  to the  income  from the  resale cf such usufruct.



473





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk

5/1/5/3 Salam  certificates  (Salam Sukuk)

The  issuer  of the  certificates  is a seller  of  the  goods of Salam, the subscribers  are the buyers  of the goods, while the funds realised from subscription are the purchase    price   (Salam  capital)   of  the   goods.   The holders   of  Salam  certificates  are  the  owners   of  the Salam  goods  and  are entitled  to  the  sale price  of the certificates or the  sale price  of the  Salam  goods  sold through  a Parallel Salam,  if any.

5/1/5/4 Istisna'a  certificates  (Istisna'a Sukuk)

The issuer of these certificates  is the manufacturer (supplier/seller),  the subscribers  are the buyers  of the intended product, while the funds realised from subscription are the cost of the product. The certificate holders  own the  product and  are entitled  to the  sale price of the certificates  or the sale price of the product sold on the basis of a Parallel  Istisna'a,  if any.

5/1/5/5 Murabahah certificates  (Murabahah  Sukuk)

The issuer of the certificates  is  the seller of the Muraba• hah commodity, the subscribers  are the buyers of that commodity,,  and the realised  funds  are the purchasing cost of the commodity.  The certificate holders  own the Murabahah  commodity, and are entitled to its sale price.

5/1/5/6 Musharakah certificates  (Musharakah  Sukuk)

The issuer af the certificates is the inviter  to a partner• ship with him in a specific project or determined activ• ity. The subscribers are the partners  in the Musharakah contract. The realised funds are the share contribution of the subscribers  in the Musharakah capital. The cer• tificate holders own the assets of partnership with the accompanying  profits  and  losses  and  are entitled   to
their  share in the profits of the partnership,  if any.



474





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk

5/1/5/7 Mudarabah  certificates (Mudarabah  Sukuk)

The  issuer  of these  certificates   is the  Mudarib,  the subscribers  are the owners of capital,  and the realised funds   are  the   Mudarabah   capital.   The   certificate holders  own the assets of Mudarabah and the agreed upon  share  of the  profits  belongs  to  the  owners  of capital and they bear the loss,  if any.

5/1/5/8 Certificates ct investment  agency (Wakalah  Sukuk) The issuer of these certificates is the investment  agent,
the  subscribers   are  the  principals   and  the  realised
funds are the entrusted  capital of the investment.  The certificate  holders  own the  assets  represented  by the certificates  with  its  benefits  and  risks,  and  they  are entitled  to the profits,  if any.

5/1/5/9 Muzara'ah certificates  (Muzara'ah  Sukuk)

a)    The issuer of these certificates  is  the owner  of the land (the  principal  owner or owner of  the usufruct ct the land). The subscribers  are the cultivators  on the  basis ct a Muzara'ah  contract   (the  cultivators or their assignees). The realised funds are the cultivation  cost.
b)   The issuer  of  these certificate may be the cultivator (the worker), the subscribers  are the owners of  the land   (investors  whose  subscription   amounts   are
used to  buy the  land);  and the  certificate  holders
are entitled to a share of  the produce  ct the land  as per agreement.
5/1/5/10 Musaqat  certificates  (Musaqat  Sukuk)
a)   The  issuer  ct these  certificates  is   the owner  (or owner of usufruct)  of  the land  that consists af trees; the subscribers are those who assume the obligation of irrigation through  a Musaqat contract, while the realised funds are the maintaining  cost of  the trees.



475





Shari'ah  Standard No (17):  Investment  Sukuk

b)   The issuer of these certificates  may be the irrigator (the  worker)  and the subscribers  are the owners  of the land (investors whose subscription amounts are used to  irrigate  the  land).  The  certificate  holders are entitled  to a share of the produce of the trees as per agreement.

5/1/5/11 Mugharasah certificates (Mugharasah  Sukuk)

a)   The issuer of these certificates is  the owner  of land suitable  for  planting   (trees),  the  subscribers  are those who assume the obligation  of planting  on the basis of a Mugharasah contract, while the realised funds are the cost of maintaining the plantation.
b)  The  issuer  may  be  the  planter  (the  owner  of  the work),  the subscribers  are  the owners  of the  land (investors  whose subscription  amounts  are used to
undertake plantation in the land), and the certificate holders  are entitled  to a share in both the trees and the land  as per agreement.

5/1/6  The  relationships  between  the parties,  namely  the issuer  and the  subscriber   shall  be governed   by  applicable  contracts   of issuing  Sukuk.  The mere  conclusion  of the  contract  will give rise to legal effects with respect to rights  and obligations  of the parties.

5/1/7  The issuance of the prospectus represents  the issuer's invitation to subscription  in which case the act of subscription represents an offer.  As for acceptance,  it  is  issuer's  approval  of the  sub• scription,  unless it is  expressly stated  in the prospectus  that  it is  an offer. In this case, the prospectus will be considered as an offer and the subscription  becomes an acceptance.

5/1/8  The following shall  be observed  in the prospectus of issue:

5/1/8/1  The prospectus  must include all contractual  conditions, adequate  statements  about the participants  in the issue,



476





Shari'ah  Standard No (17):  Investment  Sukuk

their  legal  position  and  rights  as well   as obligations, such as statements about the issue agent,  issue manager, originator,  investment  trustee,  the party covering  the loss,  payment  agent  as well as others  along  with the conditions  of their appointment  and dismissal.

5/1/8/2  The prospectus ofSukuk  must include the identification of the contract on the basis  ct which the certificates are to be issued, such as sale of  tangible leased assets, ljarah, Murabahah,  Istisna'a,  Salam,  Mudarabah,  Musharakah,
Wakalah,  Muzara'ah,  Mugharasah  or Musaqat.

5/1/8/3 The contract  that forms the basis of the issue must be complete  with respect to  its elements and  conditions and  should  not  include  conditions  that  conflict  with its objectives and rules.

5/1/8/4  The prospectus must explicitly mention the obligation to abide by the rules and principles  of  the Shari'ah,  and that there is  a Sharf'ah  Supervisory Board  that approves the procedures ct the issues and monitors the implementation of  the project throughout its  duration.

5/1/8/5 The prospectus  must  state that  the  investment  of the realised funds and the assets  into which the funds are converted  will be  undertaken  through  Shari'ah-com• pliant modes of investment.
5/1/8/6 Taking into account item  3/1/5 of the Shari'ah Standard No. (12) on Sharikah (Musharakah) and Modern  Cor• porations,  the prospectus  must  state  that  each owner
of a certificate participates  in the profit and bears a loss in proportion to the fi nancial value represented  by his certificates.

5/1/8/7 The  prospectus  must  not  include  any  statement   to the effect that  the issuer of the certificate  accepts the liability to compensate  the owner of the certificate  up to  the  nominal   value  of the  certificate  in situations



477





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk

other  than torts and negligence  nor that he guarantees a fixed percentage  of profit.  It is,  however,  permitted to an independent third  party  to provide  a guarantee
free of charge,  while  taking into account  item  7/6 of
Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (5)  on  Guarantees.  It is also permitted  to  the   issuer  of  the  certificate   to  offer some  tangible   or  personal   guarantees   with  respect to  its wrongful  acts or  negligence,  while  taking  into account  item  3/1/4/3  of Sharf'ah  Standard  No. (12)  on Sharikah   (Musharakah)  and  Modern   Corporations
as well as the contracts  stated  in that standard.

5/1/9  It is permissible  for the institution  to undertake  to underwrite the  unsubscribed  issue,  in  which  case the  obligation  of  the underwriter is  based cm  a binding  promise.  The underwriter should not receive any commission  in lieu ct such underwriting taking into account  item  4/1/2/4  of Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (12) on Sharikah  (Musharakah) and Modern  Corporations.

5/1/10  It is permissible  to issue  Sukuk on a short-term, medium-term or long-term  basis  in accordance   with  the  principles  of the Sharf'ah.  The  Sukuk  may  also  be issued  without  specifying a period  depending   upon  the nature  of the contract  underly• ing the Sukuk  issue.

5/1/11  It  is  permissible for the issuer  or the certificate holders to adopt permissible  methods  ct managing  risk, of mitigating  fluctua• tion of distributable  profits  (profit  equalisation  reserve),  such as establishing an Islamic insurance  fund with contributions of certificate holders, or by participating  in insurance  (Takafl) by payment  of premiums  from  the income  of the shares of Sukuk holders or through  donations  (Tabarruat) made by the Sukuk holders.

5/2  Trading of Sukuk and their  redemption

5/2/1   It  is  permissible,  after closing subscription,  allotment  of Sukuk
and commencement ct activity, to trade in and redeem investment



478





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk

Sukuk that represent  common  ownership  of tangible assets, usufructs  or services.  As for  trading  or redemption  prior  to the commencement af activity, it is  necessary to observe the rules of the contract  of Sarf (currency exchange)  along with the rules for debts (receivables) when liquidation  is complete and the assets are receivables  er when the assets represented  by  the Suk:uk are sold for a deferred price.

5/2/2  In the case of negotiable Sukuk, it is permissible for the issuer to  undertake,  through  the  prospectus  of issue,  to  purchase at market  value,  after  the  completion of the  process  of issue, any  certificate that  may be offered to him, however, it  is not permissible  for the issuer  to undertake to purchase the Sukuk at their  nominal  value

5/2/3  The certificates may be traded  through any known  means, that do not contravene the rules of the Shari'ah, such as registration, electronic  means  or actual  transmission  by the  bearer to the purchaser.

5/2/4  It is  permissible,  immediately  upon  issue  and  up to the  date of maturity,,  but  after  the  passing  of ownership of the  assets to the holders   of the Sukuk, to trade  in Sukuk  that  represent ownership af  existing  leased  assets  or assets  to  be leased  on promise.
5/2/5 It is  permissible  for the  issuer to  redeem,  prior  to maturity., certificates of ownership of leased  assets at the market  price or at a rate  agreed  upon, at the date  of redemption, between  the certificate  holder  and the issuer

5/2/6  It is permissible to trade  in securities of ownership of usufructs of tangible  assets prior  to a contract for sub-leasing the assets. When  the assets are sub-leased, the certificate represents rent receivables, which  makes  it a debt owed  by  the  second  lessor subject  to the rules  and regulations for disposal  of debts.
5/2/7  It is permissible for the issuer to redeem  Sukuk of ownership of the usufruct of tangible  assets from the holder,  after allotment



479





Shari'ah  Standard No (17):  Investment  Sukuk

and  payment   of the  subscription  price,   at the  market  price or  at a price  agreed  upon  between  the parties  at the  time  of redemption,  on  the  condition   that  the  subscription  amount or redemption price  is  not  deferred.  [see item  3/4 of Shari'ah Standard No.  (9)  on Ijarah and Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek]

5/2/8 It is   not  permissible  to  trade  in certificates  of ownership   of usufructs  of a described   asset  before  the  asset  from   which usufruct  is   to  be made   available  is   ascertained,  except  by observing  the rules for disposal  of receivables.  When  the asset is  ascertained, trading  in Sukuk of usufructs of such asset may take place.

5/2/9     is  permissible  to trade  in securities  of ownership  ct services to be provided  by a specified  party  prior  to sub-leasing  such services. When the services are sub-leased,  the certificate represents   rent  receivables  to  be collected  from the  second lessee.  In  this  case,  the  certificate  represents  a debt  and  is, therefore,  subject  to the  rules  and  regulations  of disposal  of debts.

5/2/10  It not is permissible to trade in securities of ownership of services to be provided  by a party to be specified in the future before the source from which the services would be provided  is  identified, except by  observing  the rules  for dealing  in debts.  When  the source of services is  identified,  trading  in such Sukuk  may take
place.

5/2/11  It is  permissible to  set up  a parallel  Ijarah  on  tangible  assets by employing  the same  description  for the  usufruct that  was provided  to the holders  of the Sukuk  in cases detailed  in items
5/2/8   and  5/2/10   provided   the two  lease   contracts  remain
independent.

5/2/12  It is permissible  for the second buyer of the usufruct  of existing and specified assets to resell them. The buyer is also entitled to issue certificates  in this  respect.



480





Shari'ah  Standard No (17):  Investment  Sukuk

5/2/13  It is permissible  to trade  in or redeem  Istisna'a certificates if the funds  have been  converted,  within  the period  of the Istisna'a, into  assets  owned  by certificate holders.  If the  realised  funds are immediately paid as a price in a parallel  Istisna'a contract or the manufactured item is  submitted to the ultimate  purchaser, then trading  in Istisna'a certificates is subject to rules of disposal
of debts.

5/2/14  It is  not permissible to trade  in Salam certificates.

5/2/15  I is   not  permissible  to trade  in Murabahah  certificates  after delivery  of the Murabahah commodity to the  buyer. However, trading  of Murabahah certificates  is  permissible  after purchas• ing the Murabahah commodity and before selling it to the buyer.

5/2/16 I is  permissible  to  trade in  Mudarabah,  Musharakah and investment agency  certificates after  closing  of subscription, allotment of the  certificates and  commencement of activity with  respect  to the  assets and usufructs.
5/2/17  I is  permissible to trade  in Muzara'ah  and Musaqat  certificates after  closing   of subscription,  allotment  of certificates  and commencement cf activity with respect to the assets and usufructs. This rule applies when the certificate holders  own the land.  Thus, trading  in these  certificates  is  not  allowed where  the certificate holders act as workers (who undertake  to provide agricultural  or irrigation works) in which case trading  in these certificates is  not permissible before the maturity cf the fruits and plants.

5/2/18  It  is permissible to trade  in Mugharasah  certificates  after closing of subscription,  allotment of certificates and  commencement of activity  irrespective of the  certificate holders  being  owners Of the land  or workers.

6. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard  was issued on 7 Rabi' I,  1424 A.H., corresponding to 8 May
2003A.D.



481





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment Sukuk





Adoption of the Standard


The Sharf'ah Standard on Commercial Papers was adopted  by the Sharf'ah
Board in its  10 meeting held on 2-7 Rabi' I,  1424 A.H.,, corresponding to 3-8
May2003A.D.













































482





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment Sukuk





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No.  (7) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah during the period of 9-13  Ramadan  1422  A.H,,  corresponding  to 24-28 November 2002  A.D., the Shari'ah Board decided to give priority  to the preparation  of the Shari'ah Standard  for Investment Sukuk.

On Saturday 14 Shawwal  1422 A.H., corresponding to 29 December 2002
A.D.,  a Shari'ah  consultant  was commissioned   to prepare  a juristic  study and an exposure draft on the Shari'ah Standards  for Commercial  Papers.
In its  2 meeting of Committee  (1),  held in the Kingdom of Bahrain  on
4-5  Safar  1423  A.H.,  corresponding  to  17-18  April 2002  A.D., the Shari'ah Standard Committee discussed the exposure draft of the Shari'ah Standard on Investment Sukuk  and asked the consultant to make additional  amendments to reflect the comments  made by the  members of the committee.

In its meeting No. (4) held on 16 and I7 Rabi' I,  1423 A.H., corresponding to 28-27 June  2002 A.D.,  the committee  discussed  the exposure  draft and made necessary amendments as per the  comments  and observations  of the members  and in the light of  the recommendations Of AAOIFTs First Fiqh Forum  in respect to requirements  of trading  in investment  portfolios  held in Amman  (The Hashimite Kingdom  of Jordan)  on  16 Rabr' I, 1423 A.H., corresponding to 27  June  2002 A.D.

In its  meeting  No.  (5)  held on 2 and 3  Rajah 1423  A.H.,  corresponding to  9-10  September  2002  A.D.,  and  decided  to merge  the exposure  ct this Standard  with  the exposure  draft  of the  Standard  on  Securitisation.  In its meeting No.  (6) held on 19  Rajab 1423  A.H., corresponding to 26 September
2002 A.D.,  in the Kingdom ct Bahrain, the Committee  further discussed the



483





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk

exposure  after the merger,  made some amendments and decided  to present
it to the Sharf'ah  Board.

The  revised  exposure  draft  of the  Sharf'ah  Standard  was presented to the  Shari'ah  Board  in  its  9th  meeting  held  in Makkah  Al-Mukarramah during  the  period  of 11-16  Ramadan   1423  A.H.,  corresponding to 16-21
November 2002 A.D.  The Sharf'ah  Board made  further amendments to the
exposure  draft  ct the  Standard   and  decided  that  it  should  be distributed to specialists  and  interested  parties in order  to obtain  their  comments in order to discuss  them  in a public  hearing.

A public  hearing  was  held  in Bahrain  on  18  Dhul-Hajjah   1423  A.H., corresponding to 19  February  2003 A.D.  The public  hearing  was attended by  more  than  thirty  participants  representing central  banks,  institutions, accounting  firms,  Sharf'ah   scholars,   academics    and   others   who   are interested  in this field.  Members  of the Shari'ah  Standards  Committees (1)
and  (2)  responded to  the  written  comments  that  were  sent  prior  to  the public  hearing  as well as to the oral comments that  were expressed  in the public  hearing.

The Shari'ah  Standards  Committees (1)  and (2) held a joint  meeting on
2 Muharram  1424  A.H.,  corresponding to 5 March  2003 A.D.,  to discuss the comments made  about  the exposure  draft.  The two committees made the necessary  amendments in light ct both the written  comments that were received  and oral comments that took place in the public  hearing.

The Sharf'ah Board in its meeting No.  (10) held in A]-Madinah Al-Munaw•
warah during  the period  of 2-7 Rabi' I,  1424  A.H., corresponding to 3-8 May
2003   A.D.,, discussed the amendments made by the Shari'ah Standards Com• mittee, and made  necessary  amendments.  The Shari'ah  Board unanimously adopted  some of the items  of the Standard  and some items  were adopted  by
the majority  vote of the members  of the Shari'ah  Board,  as recorded  in  the
minutes of the meetings  of the Shari'ah  Board.









484





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment Sukuk





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


■    The basis for the permissibility of issuing investment certificates is  that such certificates are usually issued on the basis  of Shari'ah-nominated contracts.  Hence issuance of Sukuk on the basis of any of these contracts becomes acceptable  as well.
■       The basis for considering the issue  prospectus  as an offer  and the fact of subscription  as an acceptance is  that valid contracts take place on the basis ct anything that indicates consent without specifying a particular form  of expression.  It is thus not objectionable that an offer comes from one person and acceptance from a large number ct persons.
■    The basis for the right of certificate holders  to management  is  that they
own the property  that  their certificates represent,  and management  is part of ownership.
■    The basis  for permissibility of trading  in investment Sukuk  when such
Sukuk represent shares in tangible assets a- usufruct is that the trading is, in fact,  on the assets and usufructs.  Since  these assets may be traded so too the certificates that represent them.
•  The basis for impermissibility <i trading in Salam certificates is  that the
certificate represents a share in the Salam debt in which case the certifi•
cates is  subject to rules of debt trading.
• The basis for permissibility  of trading in Istisna'a certificates after conversion of the realized funds into assets is that such assets represent properties  that  can be disposed  of.  The basis for the impermissibility of trading  in Istisna'a  certificates in  case of using the realized funds as a price in  a parallel Istisna'a and in case of delivering the manufactured asset to the ultimate purchaser is that the certificate represents the price in the liability of the purchaser. The price then is a monetary  debt for which trading  of  the  Sukuk at this stage is subject to the rules of debt trading.



485





Shari'ah  Standard  Na (17):  Investment Sukuk

• The  basis  for the impermissibility of trading in Murabahah  certificates after the commodity is sold and delivered to the buyer is that the certificates represent a monetary  debt against the buyer, in which case trading is  not permissible except in accordance with the limitations of debt trading.  However, if purchase of the commodity  has  taken place and is yet to be sold,  trading in these certificates is permissible because the certificates represent assets that can be traded.














































486





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk





Appendix (C)
Definitions


Securitisation  (Tawreeq)

Securitisation  is   known  in Arabic  terminology  as  Tskik (issues)  and Tsnid  (securities).  Securitisation  is  a process of dividing ownership of tan• gible assets, usufructs  or both into units of equal value and issue  securities as per their value.

Issue Contract

Issue contract is  the contract that form  basis for issuance  of the investment certificates.

Issuer of Investment Certificate

Issuer of investment  certificate is  the party who uses the realised funds in a Shari'ah-compliant  investment  instrument.  The issuer  could be a firm, an  individual,  a  government  or  a  financial  institutiOn.  The  issuer  may delegate,  for  a consideration  or commission,  the process of arranging  the operation  of the issue  to a financial intermediary,,  which may be stipulated by the issue  prospectus.

Issue Agent

It  is  an intermediary  institution  that manages  the process  of issue  and performs  all procedural  arrangements  pertaining   to the  issue  on  behalf of the  issuer  against  a specific  fe to  be agreed  upon  or  to  be stated  in the prospectus  of issue.  The relationship  between the issuer  and the issue agent is  governed  agency contract  with  remuneration.
Issue Manager

Issue manager is  the intermediary, institution  that acts for  remuneration
on behalf of the subscribers  in executing the issue  contract.



487





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk

Payment  Underwriter

Payment  underwriter  is  the intermediary institution  that undertakes  to
pay dues of certificate holders after when realised.

Investment Manager
Investment   manager  is the  party appointed by the  issuer or the  issue manager  to perform  all or part  of investment  operations as indicated  in the issue  prospectus.

Investment Trustee
Investment trustee  is  the intermediary  financial institution  charged with protecting  the interests  of certificate holders,  supervising  the performance of the  issue  manager  and  safe custody  of documents  and  guarantees  for consideration  stipulated in the issue prospectus on the basis of agency contract

Trading  of Certificates
Trading of certificates  refers to disposal of the ownership right contained in the  certificate  through   selling,  pledging,  gift or any other  permissible means of disposal.

Muzara'ah (Sharecropping)
Sharecropping  is  partnership  in crops in which one party presents  land to another  for cultivation and maintenance  in consideration  for a common defined share in the crop.
Musaqat  (Irrigation)

Irrigating  partnership is  a partnership  that depends  on  one party pre• senting  designated   plants/trees  that  produce  edible  fruits  to  another   in order  to work on their  irrigation in consideration for a common  defined share in  the fruits.
Mugharasah (Share-Agriculture)

Agricultural partnership is  a partnership  in  which  one party presents a treeless piece of land to another to plant trees on it on the condition that they share the trees and  fruits  in  accordance  with a defi ned percentage.








488

























