Shari'ah Standard No.  (10)



Salam and Parallel Salam


(Revised Standard)












Contents


Subject                                                                                            Page
Pref: ilce...................................................................................................     271
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        272

I.  Scope  of the Standard  ..........sos.so.so.so.so.oso.sos.o.so.sos.so......        272

}  Contract of Salam........s.sos.ssssssss.sos.ass.sos.ssssssssssssss..sos.sos.sos...ass.,        37}
3.  Subject  Matter of Salam...........................................................................       273
4.  Changes to al-Muslatn  Fihi.....................................................................         276
5,  Delivery of  al-Muslam Fihi ..........s.ass. sos» sos.s.s as s.sos.s os» s o. s o .s.sos ...                     276
6.  Parallel Salatn............................................................................................         278
7.  Salam  Sukuk  Issues..................................................................................          279
8.  Date of Issuance of the Standard.......................................................       279
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        280
Appendices
Appendix (a):   Brief History  of the Preparation  of the Standard..............          281
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard.....................................         284
Appendix (c):   Definitions..............................................................................       289





















269








IN  THE NAME OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all  the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all  his companions





Preface


The aim of the standard  is  to explain the rules for and limitations  of Salam and Parallel Salam in respect to concluding  a Salam contract, the subject matter of Salam  and changes to the contract,  whether in the event cf ability to  deliver or otherwise.  The standard  also explains rulings  in respect to issuing Salam Sukuk.



































271





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salam





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This  standard   covers  Salam  and  Parallel  Salam  transactions,  whether the Institution is  the buyer  or the seller, and  issuing Salam Sukuk.  This standard   does  not  cover  lstisna'a  (manufacturing  or supplier  contract) because the latter  is  covered by a separate standard.

2. Contract  of Salam

2/1   General  framework for Salam  contracts

2/1/1  It is  permissible to initiate through  negotiations several Salam contracts  (with different  parties). Each operation  will end at its due date.  It is  also permissible  to draw up a general framework or a master  agreement   that  consists  of an understanding to conclude  successive  Salam  contracts,  each ct which  will take
place at an appropriate time. In this latter case, the transaction involved shall be concluded  on the basis of a memorandum of understanding in which the contracting parties  determine the framework  of the  contract  and the intention  of the   parties  to buy and sell. The parties  shall also determine the quantity  and specifications of the goods,  the  manner  af their  delivery,  the basis for determining the price,  and the manner  of payment. The  types of guarantees  and other  prospective  arrangements shall  also  be specified  in  the  memorandum.  The  execution of each Salam  contract  may then  take place separately  at the appropriate date.

2/1/2 If the  Salam  contract  is  concluded   on  the  basis of what  was initially  agreed  in  the  memorandum  of understanding,  the contents  of the  memorandum become  part and  parcel  of the contract.  This will hold. true unless the parties agreed when the



272





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (10):  Salam and Parallel Salm

contract was concluded  to exempt themselves  from some of the obligations  referred  to in the memorandum of understanding.

2/2 Form of a Salam contract

A contract  of Salam  may be concluded using the word Salam,  or Salaf, or sale,  or any term that indicates  sale of a prescribed  commodity for deferred delivery in exchange for immediate  payment  of the price.

3. Subject Matter of Salam

3/1  Capital of Salam contract and its conditions

3/1/1 It is  permissible for the  capital  of Salam  to be in the form  of fungible  goods  (such  as wheat  and  other  cereals)   in  which case  the  parties   must  make  sure  that  they  do  not  fall  into Riha. The capital may also be items of: material  value (such as livestock).  It is  also permissible  for it to be in the form  of the general  usufruct of a particular asset,  such as living in a house or having  the use of an aircraft  or a ship for  a certain period. In such a case, when  a party  is  granted  access to the usufruct through   delivery  of the  asset,  this  is  regarded   as  immediate receipt (possession)  of the Salam capital.

3/1/2  The capital af Salam should  be made known  to the two parties in a manner  that  removes  all uncertainty and  eliminates   the possibility of dispute.  In principle,  the capital of Salam should be in the form rf cash.  In this case, the currency of payment, the
amount  and the  manner  of  payment  shall  be clearly  defined.
If the capital  of  Salam is  in the form  of fungibles,    then  the kind,  type, specifications and quantity of these shall be clearly defined.
3/1/3  The capital in a Salam contract  must be paid immediately  at the place where the contract  is concluded. However, as an exception to this  ruling, payment  may be delayed for two or three  days at

(I) Fungi bles are goods that share common features such that they do not differ significantly.
Any fungibles can be replaced by any other in the event of destruction, without need to
assess the value of the item destroyed or the one replacing  it.



273





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salm

most. Even if such a short delay has been stipulated  earlier, this will not  affect  the Salam  contract provided  that  the  period  of delay is  not equal to or greater than the delivery period  for al Muslam Fihi.

3/1/4 It is  not permitted that  a debt  be recognised as the capital  of Salam,  such  as using  as the  capital of Salam  loans  or debts owed  by the  seller  to  the  Institution  as a result  of previous transactions.

3/2 Al-Muslam FHhi and its conditions

3/2/1  Salam  contracts are permitted  for  fungible  goods,  like those that  may  be  weighed,  measured   or  counted,  the  articles  ct which  do  not  differ  in any significant  manner,  provided  that
no Riba ensues.

3/2/2 Among  the  items  for which  variations  in numbers   make  no difference  are  the  products  of companies   that  manufacture goods  in approximate units that  are identified  by trademarks, standardised  specifications and  are regularly  and  commonly available at any time.  However,  this rule must be read together with item  3/2/8.

3/2/3  Salam is not permitted for anything  specific like "this car. Nor is  it permitted for  anything   fer- which  the  seller  may  not  be held  responsible,  like  land, buildings  or trees;  or for  articles whose  values  change  according  to subjective  assessment,  like jewellery  and  antiques.  Also, it is not  permissible to stipulate that  al-Muslam   Fihi  must  be from  a specific  piece  of land. However, on the delivery date the seller may present  the buyer with whatever  items are available (and meet the contract specifications), irrespective of whether  such items are from his own fields or factories  or elsewhere.

3/2/4 It is  not  permissible   for al-Muslam  Fihi to  be an amount  of currency,  gold or silver,  if the capital of the Salam contract  was paid in the form of currency,  gold or silver.



274





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salam

3/2/5  Al-Muslam    Fihi   must   be the   kind   of  article   for   which a specification   may  be  drawn  up  so that  the  seller may  be held responsible  for its conformity to the specification.  It will be sufficient if the specification  is explained  in a manner  that removes  uncertainty,  except for minor  discrepancies that are customarily  ignored, considered   acceptable,  and  not  usually regarded  as grounds  for dispute.

3/2/6  It is a requirement that al-Muslam  Fihi be clearly known to the contracting parties  in a manner  that eliminates  any possibility of uncertainty   or  ambiguity.  The  reference  for determining descriptions  that  are used to specify and  identify  al-Muslam Fihi  is  customary  practice and the experience  of experts.

3/2/7 It is a requirement that the parties know the quantity of al-Mus• lam  Fihi.  The quantity of each item  is  determined  according to its condition  and nature  with regard to weight,  measurement, volume and number.
3/2/8  I is a requirement  that al-Muslam Fihi  be commonly  available under normal  circumstances  at the place where it should be on the delivery date,  so that the commodity  will be accessible  to the seller in order to discharge his obligation by delivering it to the buyer.

3/2/9  It is  a requirement  that  the  date  of delivery  for  al-Muslam Fihi be known  in a manner  that eliminates any uncertainty or ambiguity  which may lead to a dispute. There  is  no Shari'ah objection  to the  contracting  parties  setting  various  dates  on which the delivery of al-Muslam  Fihi may take place, in instalments,  provided  the  capital  of Salam  was paid  at the time the contract  was originally  concluded.

3/2/10  In principle,  the parties  may designate  the  place at which  al• Muslam  Fihi is  to be delivered.  If the  parties  to the  contract do not determine  the place of delivery,  then the place at which the  contract  was concluded  will be regarded  as the place  of delivery unless it  turns  out to be impossible  to make delivery



275





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salm

to such  a place.  In that  case,  the  place  of delivery  should  be
determined according  to customary practice.

3/3  Security for al-Muslam  Fihi

Al-Muslam  Fihi  may be secured by a mortgagee or a guarantee  or any
other permissible  means of securing  payment.

4. Changes to al-Muslam  Fihi

4/1   Selling  al-Muslam Fihi before  taking  possession

It is not permitted for the buyer to sell al-Muslam  Fihi  before taking possession  of it.

4/2  Replacement of al-Muslam Fihi

It is  permissible  for the buyer to exchange al-Muslam  Fihi  for other goods, except currency, after the delivery date falls due, as long as such a substitution  was not  stipulated  in the  contract.  This  rule  applies whether  or  not  the substitute  is  similar  in kind to al-Muslam  Fihi. This  is  provided  that  the substitute  is   suitable  for  being  exchanged as al-Muslam  Fihi  for the capital of the Salam  contract,  and that the market  value of the substitute  should  not be greater than  the market value of al-Muslam  Fihi at the time of delivery.
4/3 Cancellation  (lqalah) of a Salam contract

It is permissible, when both  parties  agree, to cancel the entire  Salam contract  in return  for repayment  in full of the amount  of the capital of Salam.  Partial cancellation,  that  is,  cancellation of the delivery  of part  of al-Muslam  Fihi, in return for repayment of a corresponding part  of the capital of Salam,  is also permissible.
5. Delivery of  al-Muslam Fihi

5/1  The  seller  is  under  an obligation  to  deliver  al-Muslam   Fihi to  the buyer on the due date in accordance  with  the terms  cf the contract, such as agreed  specifications  and  quantity.  The  buyer, on the other hand, must accept the goods if they meet the specifications explained
in the contract.  If the buyer refuses to accept al-Muslam  Fihi, he shall
be compelled  to do so.



276





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salm

5/2  If the seller offers delivered goods of a quality that is  superior  to that required  by  the  contractual   specifications,  the  buyer  must  accept the goods,  provided  that  the seller shall not seek a higher  price for the better  quality.  This may be considered  one of the ways in which a contract  is  ethically  fulfilled.  However, this  will apply only  if the (inferior)  description  specified  in the  contract  is  not  itself deemed vital.

5/3  If the quality of the delivered goods is inferior to that required by the contractual specifications, the buyer is  entitled  either to reject or to accept the goods in that condition. If he accepts the goods, his  action is  considered  as ethical acceptance. It is  also permissible  for the two parties to agree to a settlement  on terms for acceptance  cf the goods even at a discounted  price.

5/4 It is not permitted  for a seller to deliver al-Muslam Fihi in the form of a commodity  different  from the one agreed upon  if the commodity is  considered  to belong to the  same genus as al-Muslarn  Fihi (e.g., al-Muslam  Fihi is  corn  and  the commodity  that the seller wants to deliver  is  wheat).  However,  the  delivery  of al-Muslarn  Fihi  in the form of a different  type  of commodity  from  that agreed  upon  may take place only on the basis of the conditions  for the replacement  of al-Muslam  Fihi  by other goods.  [sze  item 4/2]
5/5  Delivery of al-Muslam  Fihi may take  place befor?  the due date, on condition  that  the goods  conform  to the agreed  specifications and quantities.  If the  buyer  has a valid  reason  for rejecting  the goods, then  he will not be compelled  to accept them.  Otherwise, the buyer will be forced to accept the goods.

5/6 If the seller fails to perform  his obligation, owing to insolvency, he should  be granted  an extension  of time for delivery.

5/7  h is not permitted to stipulate  a penalty  clause in  respect of delay in the delivery of al-Muslam  Fihi.

5/8  ht case all or part of al-Muslam  Fihi is not available to the seller on
the due date,  the buyer shall have the following options:



277





Sharf'ah  Standar d No  (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salm

5/8/1  To wait  until al-Muslam FHhi  is  available.

5/8/2  'Tb cancel  the contract  and recover the paid  capital.

It is also permissible  for the parties to agree to replacement  of
al-Muslam  hi  by other goods.  [see  item  4/2]

6. Parallel Salam

6/1  It is permissible  for the seller to enter  into a separate, independent Salam  contract with a third party in order to acquire goods of a similar specification to those specified in the first Salam contract, so that the first  Salam  obligation will be  discharged  by  delivering these goods. Hence, the seller in the first Salam contract becomes the buyer in the second Salam  contract.

6/2  It is  permissible  for the buyer to conclude  a separate parallel Salam with a third  party  for the purpose  cf selling,  en the basis  cf Salam, a commodity  whose  description  corresponds  lo the description  of the commodity  to be acquired  through  the first Salam  contract.  In this  situation,  the  buyer  in  the  first  Salam  contract  becomes  the seller in the second Salam contract.

6/3  In both the two  situations mentioned  in items 6/l and 6/2, it is not permissible  for  the  parties  to  link the  obligations  under  the  two Salam  contracts  together  so that  the  execution  of the  obligations of one contract  is  contingent  on the  outcome  of the  other.  Hence, it is   necessary  that  both  the  obligations  and  the rights  under  the two  contracts  stand  alone  in all  respects.  Therefore,  if one  party breaches  his  obligation  under  the  first  Salam  contract,  the  other party (the injured  party)  has no right  to relate this damage or loss  to the party with whom  he concluded  a Parallel  Salam.  Consequently. he has no right  on the basis  of his  loss  or damage  under  the first Salam  contract  to terminate  the second  Salam  contract or to delay in  performing  it.
6/4 All the rules cf Salam  as  explained in items  1-5  above are applicable to Parallel Salam  as well.



278





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salm

7. Salam  Sukuk  Issues

It is  not permitted to issue tradable  Sukuk based on the debt from a Salam contract. [see  item  (4/1)]
8. Date  of Issuance of the Standard

This Sharf'ah Standard was issued on 29 Safar  1422 A.H., corresponding
to 23 May 2001  A.D.














































279





Sharf'ah  Standar d Na (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salam





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah  Standard  on Salam  and Parallel  Salam  was adopted  by the Shari'ah Board in its meeting No  (6)  held on 25-29 Safar 1422 A.H., corresponding  to 19-23 May 200I A.D.

In its meeting No.  (8)  held in Mecca on 28 Safar  - 4 Rabi'.  I  1423  A.H., corresponding  to  11-16  May 2002 A.D.,  the  Shari'ah  Board  readopted a resolution to reformat the Shari'ah Rules for Salam and Parallel  Salam in the form of a Shari'ah Standard.






































280





Sharr'ah  Standar d No  (10):  Salam and Parallel  Salam





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its  meeting No.  (5) held  in Makkah Al-Mukarramah  on 8-12  Ramadan
1421  A.H.,  corresponding to 4-8 December 2001  A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Board decided to give priority to the preparation of the a Shari'ah  rules for  Salam and Parallel  Salam.

On  Monday  11   Shawwal   1420  A.H., corresponding  to  17  January  2000
A.D.,  the Fatwa  am Arbitration Committee decided  to commission  a Sharf'ah
consultant to prepare a juristic  study and an exposure  draft on the Shari'ah
Rules for Salam  and Parallel  Salam.

In its  meeting  held  in Bahrain  on 21-23  Muharram   1421  A.H.,  corre•
sponding  to 26-28 April 2000 A.D., the Fatwa and Arbitration  Committee discussed  the  exposure  draft of the  Shari'ah  rules for Salam and Parallel Salam  and  asked  the  consultant  to make the  amendments   in light of the comments  made by the members.

In its  meeting No.  (4) held  in Abu Dhabi,  United Arab Emirates, on  14
Sha'ban  1421  A.H., corresponding  to  10 November  2000 A.D., the Fatwa and Arbitration Committee discussed the  exposure  draft and made some relevant amendments.
The  revised  exposure  draft  ct the Shari'ah rules was presented  to the Shari'ah   Board  in  its  meeting  No.   (5)  held  in  Makkah  Al-Mukarramah on 8-12  Ramadan  1421  A.H.,  corresponding  to 4-8 December  2000 A.D. The  Shari'ah  Board  made  further  amendments  to  the  exposure  draft  of the  standard  and  decided  that  it should  be  distributed  to specialists  and interested  parties  in order  to obtain  their  comments  to  discuss them  in a public hearing.



281





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salm

A public  hearing  was held  in Bahrain  on 4-5  Dhul-Hajjah   142l  A.H., corresponding to 27-28 February  2001  A.D.  The public hearing  was attend• ed by  more  than  30  participants  representing central  banks,  institutions, accounting  firms, Shari'.ah scholars, academics  and others  interested in this field. Members of the Shari'ah Studies Committee  responded to  the written comments  that  were sent prior  to the public hearing  as well as to the oral comments that were expressed in the public hearing.

The Fatwa and Arbitration Committee  held its meeting No. (5) in Bahrain on  15  Dhul-Hajjah   1421  A.H.,  corresponding  to  10 March  2001  A.D.,  to discuss the comments  made about the exposure  draft  The committee  made the necessary amendments in light ct both  the written  comments  that were received and oral comments  that took place in the public hearing.

The Shari'ah Board in its  meeting  No.  (6)  held in Al-Madinah  Al-Mun• awwarah on 25-29 Safar 1422 A.H., corresponding to 19-23 May 2001  A.D., discussed  the amendments made by the Fatwa and Arbitration  Committee, and made the necessary amendments. The standard  was adopted in the name of Shari'ah rules for Salam and Parallel Salam. Some paragraphs  were adopted
by the unanimous  vote of the members of the Shari'ah  Board while the other
paragraphs  were adopted  by the majority vote ct the members, as recorded in the minutes of the Shari'ah  Board.

The  Shari'ah  Board decided  in its  meeting  No.  (7)  held  in Makkah Al• Muk.arramah on 9-13  Ramadan  1422  A.H,  corresponding 24-28 November
2001A.D., to reformat all Shari'ah rules in a form of standards and a committee was formed for this purpose.
In its  meeting  No.  (8) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah on 28 Safar
- 4 Rab'  I,  1423  A.H.,  corresponding to 11-16  May 2002 A.D.,, the Sharf'ah Board adopted  the reformatted version  of the Sharf'ah  rules for Investment and Financing  No. (3) on Salam and Parallel Salam with the title of Shari'ah Standard  No.   (9)  on  Salam  and  Parallel  Salam,  without   any  substantial
changes  in the content.

The Shari'ah Standards Review Committee reviewed  the standard  in its meeting  held  in Rabi' II,   1433  A.H.,  corresponding to  March  2012  A.D.,



282





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salm

in the State of Qatar,  and proposed after deliberation a set of amendments (additions,  deletions,  and  rephrasing)  as deemed  necessary, and  then submitted the proposed amendments to the Sharf'ah Board for approval as it deemed necessary.

In its  meeting  No.  (39) held  in the  Kingdom  of Bahrain  on  13-15
Muharram   1435 A.H.,  corresponding  to  6-8 November  2014 A.D, the Shari'ah  Board discussed  the proposed  amendments   submitted  by  the Shari'ah  Standards  Review Committee.  After deliberation,  the Sharfah Board approved necessary amendments, and the standard was adopted in its current amended version.









































283





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salam





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Permissibility  of Salam
A contract of  Salam  derives  its  permissibility  from  the  Qur 'an,  the Sunnah  and Ijma'  (consensus  of Fuqaha).  On the level of the  Qur'an, Allah, the Almighty, says: {O ye who believe! When you deal with each other,  in transactions involvingfuture  obligations in afixed period time, reduce them to writing}.  Ibn Abbas said:  "I declare that a Salaf (Salam) contract  in which the commodity  is  guaranteed  for future delivery has been permitted  by Allah" and then he read:  {"O ye  who believe! When you deal with each  other,  in transactions  involving future  obligations in  a fixed  period  time,  reduce  them  to  writing"}.  I is  reported  that Ibn Abbas said: "This verse is  a revelation for the particular  purpose  of making Salam permissible.0

On  the  level  of Sunnah,  Ibn Abbas  is reported  to  have said:  "The Prophet (peace  be upon  him)  has came  to Medina  and fund  that people were selling dates for deferred delivery after a duration  of one or two years on  a Salam   basis.  The  Prophet  (peace  be upon  him) said: 'Whoever  pays
for dates  on a deferred  delivery  basis (Salam)  should  do so on  the  basis  of
a specified scale and  weight".  In another  text of the Hadith the Prophet (peace  be upon  him)  said:  "Whoever pays  on  a deferred   delivery basis should  do so on the basis of a specified scale,  weight and date of delivery".

The scholars are unanimous on the permissibility cf a Salam contract. Ibn
Mundhir said that the scholars agreed that a Salam  contract -ie, a contract

(2)  [AI-Baqarah  (The Cow):  282].
(3)  See:  Ibn  Al-Jawzi,  "Zad AI-Masir F 'Im  Al-Tafsir" [1:  336]  and Ibn  Kathir,  "Tafsir Al•
Qur 'an Al-Azim" [1:  496].
(4)  The Hadith has been related by A!-Bukhari,  Muslim and others.   See:  "Sahih   Al•
Bukhari" [2:  781],  Damascus:  Dar Al-Qalam edition;  and "Sahih Muslim"  [3:   1226],
Beirut:  Dar AL-Fikr  edition.



284





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salm

in which a person sells to his fellow  man a specific and determined  thing by
weight  or measure for a future defined date of delivery-is permissible.

Wisdom  of Making Salam Permissible

The  wisdom  of making  Salam  permissible  lies in the  fact that  Salam facilitates a type cf financing  for people in need of it.  In particular,  farmers, market  gardeners  and merchants, among  others, need working capital for their  businesses  and  for their  living expenses  in order  to operate. Hence, Salam  is  made  permissible  so that  these  businesses  may benefit  from  it. The  buyer  may benefit  from  its  permissibility   as well,  by  acquiring the commodity  at a price  below the market price.
Similarly,  a contract of Salam  responds  to the needs ct a large  number of business enterprises  at different levels,  ranging from small and medium• sized enterprises   to  conglomerates   that  are  involved  in  agricultural   and industrial  production   or trade  and the like.  In order  for  these businesses to be  productive,  they need working  capital  in the form  cf either  cash or assets.  Hence,  Salam  has provided  an investment  opportunity in the form of financing  of the working capital for trade. It also covers the demands  of those  in need of liquidity, as long as they are able to fulfill the orders  they receive in return  at the due date.

Although  the contract  of Salam is  commonly  used by agricultural busi• nesses,  its permissibility is not,  however,  confined to these fields.  It can also be used in other investment  opportunities,  such as industry  or trade.

The contract of Salam also meets immediate  needs for liquidity, This is because it  gives the seller flexibility in using the sale proceeds  (before the commodity is  delivered), and  the opportunity to arrange  for the counter• value (al-Muslam  Fihi) and its delivery to the buyer at the date of delivery,

Subject  Matter of a Salam  Contract
• The  basis for  the  permissibility  of presenting   usufruct  as  capital  in a Salam  contract  is  the view of the Maliki scholars.  This is  regarded as immediate  receipt of the capital based on the Shari'ah  maxim that says:

(5)  Ibn  Al-Mundhir,  4lIjmd" (P.  54)  and Ibn Qudamah;  AI-Maughnf"  [6:  385],  Cairo:
Matba'at Hajar edition.



285





Sharf'ah  Standar d Na (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salam

"Taking possession  of part  of a thing  is  like taking possession  of the whole thing"° Hence, this is not a sale of debt (because the buyer has received control  over the usufruct).0
■  The basis for the requirement  that the capital of Salam  must be known
to the two parties is that a Salam contract is one of the exchange contracts in  which  the  consideration   need  to  be known so as  to remove  any uncertainty."
The  basis  for  the  requirement  that  the  capital  must  be  paid  at  the conclusion  of a Salam contract  is  the saying of the Prophet  (peace be upon him):  "Whoever pays on a deferred delivery basis should do so on the  basis  of specifying  the scale."  'The  Tasdf or Islaf means  payment in advance.  Salam was so named  because  the capital  must  be paid in advance.  If payment  is delayed,  the transaction is  not called Salam.' Again,  any delay in payment  of the capital and dispersal  of the parties renders  the transaction a sale of debt for debt! which  is  prohibited,
and  the  scholars  agreed  on  its  prohibition.  Ibn  Rushd  said:  "As for
sale of debt  for debt,  Muslim  scholars  are  unanimous  regarding  its
prohibition?\?
The basis for it not being permitted that a debt be capital in Salam is because this would  render  the transaction   a form  of sale of debt and this is  prohibited  by the Shari'ah.
The basis for  the impermissibility  of Salam  where the subject matter is a specific and identified  thing  is  the Hadith  stating that  "A man  came

(6)  AI-Dardir,  Al-Sharh AI-Saghir" [4:  347].
(7)  AI-Buhuti,  Sharh Muntaha Al-Iradat" [2:  37].
(8) AI-Qadi  Abdul-Wahhab,  "AI-Ma'unah" [2:  987]  Ibn Juzay,  Al-Qawanin Al-Fiqhiyyah"
(P  202);  AI-Kasani,  Bada ' AL-Sanar" [5:  301];  Ibn Qudamah,  41-Maughni [6: 411];
and A!-Shirazi, Al-Muhadhdhab [1:  300].
(9)  The Hadith  has been related  by  Al-Bukhari,  Muslim and others:  "Sahih Al-Bukhari"
[2:  781],  Damascus:  Dar AI-Qalam edition; and "Sahih Muslim" [3:  1226],  Beirut:  Dar
Al-Fikr edition.
(I0)  Ibn Qudamah, 4l-Mughn",  [6: 408]
(11) See:  Al-Kasani,  "Bada r AI-Sana 'r [5:  202]  Ibn  Rushd  (the  grandson)  "Bidayat Al•
Mujtahid Wa Nihayat Al-Muqtasid" [2:  205],  Beirut, Dar Al-Qalam edition; Al-Qadi
Abdul-Wahhab,   "A!Ma'unah  [2:  988] and A!-Zayla'i,  "Tabyin  Al-Haqa'iq  Sharh
Kanz Al-Daqa'iq"  [4:  1I7].
(12)   bn  Rushd, "Bidayat AI-Mujtahid" [2:  150].



286





Sharf'ah  Standard  No (10):  Salam and Parallel Salam

to the  Prophet   (peace  be upon  him)  and said;  'The  kin  of so and so from the Jews had  embraced  Islam.  However,  they are hungry and I am afraid they may become apostates'.  The Prophet  (peace  be upon him) asked the people around  him;  'Who  has something  (money)?' One  Jew said;  'I have
so  and so (he mentioned   a sum  of money),  may be he  said;  'I have three
hundred dinars and I will pay such and such price for  the products  of the farm of the kin of so and so'. The Prophet  (peace  be upon him) said:  '(buy)
With  such  and such price  to be delivered  after such  and such period,  but not for  the products  of the kin of so and so"\  Again,  ifa Salam  contract
is  concluded  for providing  products  from a specific farm, there might not be products  from this  farm at the time of: delivery,  and this  leads  to Gharar  (uncertainty).
■   The basis for the requirement  that the subject-matter of Salam be com• monly available under  normal  circumstances where it is  required  is  to remove uncertainty and to ensure that the seller will be able to deliver it at the date of: delivery.
Changes  to a Salam Contract
■   The basis for the impermissibility  of selling the subject-matter of Salam before taking possession of it is because such an action is  a form of sale of debts which  is  not permissible.
■   The basis for the impermissibility  of substituting  the subject-matter  of Salam with a commodity, the price of which is higher than the prevalent market value of the subject-matter  ct: Salam at the date of delivery is  to deter the buyer from malting a compound  profit on one deal.
■  The  basis  for  the  permissibility  of the  termination  of a  Salam   by
agreement   (Iqalah)  is  because  the  Prophet  (peace be upon  him)  has encouraged  Iqalah  in  general  and  Salam  is  not  an  exception   from this concession.  Salam is  also a form  of sale and since sale contracts admit  Iqalah,  so  too does a Salam  contract. Again, Iqalah  is actually

(13)  The Hadith  has been related  by Ibn  Majah and Abu Dawud.  See  Sunan Ibn Majah" (2:  765-766];  and  Sunan  Abu Dawud"  [3:  744].  Al-Shawkani  said: "There  is an unknown narrator in the chain of transmission  of this Hadith.  This is because Abu Dawud narrated it  through Muhammad  Ibn  Kathie  from Sufyan from Abu  Ishaq from a Najrani man from Ibn  Umar. Therefore, the Hadith  is not of a strong authority. See:  "Nay] Al-Awtar"  [5:  345-346].



287





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salm

permitted  for the sale of tangible goods  in consideration  of the need of contracting parties  to be  able to  deal with  regret  and  a desire  to withdraw  from  the contract.  In the case of Salam, the possibility  that the parties  may regret  concluding  the transactions is greater  than  in the sale of tangible goods because Salam  is a low cost form of sale for which permissibility  of Iqalah  is  easily applicable  in Salam.(9
Delivery  of al-Muslam  Fihi

The basis for not allowing penalty clauses in Salam  is because al-Muslam Fihi  is considered to be a debt;  and it is  not permitted  to stipulate payment in excess of the principal amount of debts.

Parallel Salam
• The basis for the permissibility  of Parallel  Salam  is  that  it represents two  Salam deals  that  are separable  from  each other  despite  the fact that  the  descriptions  of the  subject-matter  in the  two  contracts   are similar.  However,  the contract  does not lead to two sales in one, which is  impermissible.
■  The basis for the impermissibility of tradeable  Salam Sukuk is because trading with such Sukuk  is  a form of sale of debt which  is prohibited.























(14)  See:  Al-Kasani,  "Bada 'r' AI-Sana 'r" [5:  214].



288





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salm





Appendix (C)
Definitions


Salam

A Salam  transaction  is the purchase of a commodity  for deferred delivery in exchange for immediate  payment.  It  is  a type cf sale in which the price, known  as the  Salam capital,  is   paid  at  the  time  of contracting  while the delivery of the item  to be sold, known as al-Muslam Fihi  (the subject-matter cf a Salam contract), is  deferred. 'The seller  and the buyer are known  as al• Muslam  Ilaihi  and  al-Muslam  or Rab al-Salam  respectively..  Salam  is  also known  as Salaf (literally;  borrowing).

Parallel Salam

If the  seller  enters  into  another  separate  Salam  contract  with  a third party  to acquire  goods,  the  specification  cf which  corresponds   to that  cf the commodity  specified in the first Salam  contract,  so that he (the  seller) can fulfil his  obligation  under  that  contract,  then  this second  contract  is called, in contemporary custom, Parallel Salam or Salam Muwazi. The following is  an example  cf such  a contract.  An  Institution  on  one  hand buys a specified  quantity  of cotton  from  farmers  on a Salam basis and,  in turn, the buyer in the first Salam contract  enters into a new separate Salam contract  with  textile  mills  so as to  provide  them,  by means  of that  new Salam  contract,  with cotton,  the specifications  of which are similar to the specifications  of the cotton  to be acquired  under  the first Salam contract,
without  making the execution  of the second Salam contract contingent  on the execution  of the  first Salam  contract.

Iqalah

Iqalah or cancellation of a contract is  a bilateral agreement of the contract•
ing  parties to abate and remove the legal  effect of a contract.



289





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salam

Mithlis (Fungibles)
Items that are mutually  interchangeable,  i.e.,  items whose  units  are identical (in specifications),  and if destructed,  are guaranteed  by other  identical units without  consideration  to their value.



















































290

























