Standard No. (19) on Loan (Qard),  item  8]

4/3  Expenses for delivery  of possession in a deposit (Wadi'ah)

The expenses of deposit and withdrawal  in a contract of deposit shall
be borne by the depositor  (the owner of the deposit).

5. Key Modern Applications of Possession

5/I   Possession  by the  beneficiary of a bank  draft  or personal  cheque is  deemed   constructive  possession  of the amount   payable  by  the drawee  bank.  This  is  deemed   possession   of the payable  amount even  though   there  is  delay  in the  payment   of the  actual  amount, keeping  in view what  is  laid down  in Shari'ah Standard No.  (1)  on Trading  in Currencies  (item  2/6/5)  as well as what  is  laid  down  in the  Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (12)  on  Commercial  Papers  (items  6/1 and 6/2).

5/2  Payments for a credit  card  are  deemed  constructive possession   of such payments.  [see Shari'ah Standard No. (2)  on Debit Cards  and Credit  Cards  (item  4/4)]

5/3 A deposit by a person  of an amount  in a bank account  maintained for a debtor, upon his demand  or with his consent, is deemed constructive possession  irrespective  of the  deposit   being  by  way  of cash,  by endorsement or by cheque drawn upon a bank with which an account is  maintained,  and  the depositor  is  absolved  of liability  when  he is indebted  to the extent of such amount.



497





Sharr'ah  Standard  Na (18):  Possession (Qabd)

6. Date of Issuance  of the Standard

This Standard  was issued  on 30 Rab'  I,  1425  A.H.,  corresponding to 19
May 2004 A.D.




















































498





Sharr 'ah  Standar d No.  (18):  Po ssession (Qabd)





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Standard on Possession was adopted by the Shari'ah Board in its  12 meeting held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah during the period of 26-30 Rabi I,  1424 A.H.,  corresponding  to 15-19 May 2004 A.D.












































499





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (18):  Possession (Qabd)





Appendix  (A)
Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard

In its meeting  No.  (8)  held  during  the  period  of 28  Safar  to 4 Rabi' I,
1423 A.H.,  corresponding to  11-16 May 2002  A.D.,  in Al-Madinah  Al• Munawwarah, the Shari'ah Board decided  to issue the Exposure  Draft of Shari'ah  Standard  on Possession  (Qabd).

On  24 Rajab  1423  A.H.,  corresponding  to  1     October  2002 A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Standards  Committee  decided  to assign  to a Shari'ah  consultant the responsibility  of preparing  the Exposure  Draft of the Shar'ah  Standard on Possession (Qabd).

The Shari'ah Standards Committee  (1), in its meeting No. (7), which was held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 16 Muharram  1424 A.H., corresponding to  19  March  2003  A.D.,  discussed  the  Shari'ah  study  and  required  the consultant  to incorporate  certain  necessary  amendments in the light cf the
discussion  and the comments  made by the members.

In its  meeting  No.  (8)  held on  16-17  April 2003 A.D.,,  in the Kingdom of Bahrain, the Shari'ah  Standards  Committee  ( l) discussed  the exposure draft of the Standard  on Possession in the light of the discussions  and the observations  of the members, just as the Committee  discussed the exposure draft  in  its  meeting  held during  the period  of 25-26  Rabi'  II,  1424  A.H.,
corresponding  to 25-26 June  2003 A.D.,  and made necessary  amendments to the draft in the light of the discussion  and observations  of the members.
In its  meeting  No.  (9)  held  in  Amman,  the  Hashimile   Kingdom  of Jordan,  during  the period of 23-24  Jumada  I,   1424  A.H.,  corresponding to  23-24  July  2003  A.D.,  the  Committee  discussed   the  exposure   draft and  made  necessary  amendments in the light of the discussions  and  the observations  of the members.



500





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (18):  Possession  (Qabd)

The revised exposure draft of the Standard was presented to the Sharf'ah Board  in its meeting No.  (11)  held in Makkah  Al-Mukarramah  during  the period of2-8 Ramadan 1424 A.H., corresponding  to 27 October-  2 November
2003  A.D.  The  Shari'ah  Board  incorporated   amendments  to  the exposure draft of the Standard and decided that it be distributed  among specialists and interested parties in order to obtain their comments as a preliminary  to the discussion in a public hearing.

A public hearing was held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 29 Dhul-Qadah
1424 A.H., corresponding to 21  January 2004 A.D. The public hearing was attended by more than fifteen participants representing central banks, institutions, accounting firms, Shari'ah scholars, academics and others interested  in the field. The members  of the Shari'ah  Standards  Committees (1) and (2)  responded  to the written  comments  that were sent prior to the public  hearing  as well as to the oral comments  that were expressed  in the public hearing.

The Sharf'ah  Standards  Committees  (1)  and  (2)  in a joint  meeting in the  Kingdom  of Bahrain  on 30 Dhul-Qa'dah  1424  A.H., corresponding to 22 January 2004 A.D., discussed  the comments  that were made during the  public  hearing  as well as the  observations  received  in writing.  The Committees made  amendments that were deemed  suitable.

The amended  exposure  draft was  presented  to the Drafting  Committee in  its  meeting  held  in  the  Kingdom  of Bahrain  on  25   Safar  1425  A.D, corresponding  to 15  April 2004 A.D.

The Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. (12) held in Al-Madinah  Al• Munawwarah during the period of26-30 Rabi' I,  1425 A.H., corresponding to
15-20  May 2004 A.D.,  discussed the amendments  suggested by the Shari'ah
Standards Committee  and the Drafting  Committee, and incorporated the amendments  deemed  suitable.  The  Shari'ah  Board  unanimously adopted some  of the  items  of the  Standard  and  some  items were adopted  by the majority  vote of the  members  of the  Shari'ah  Board,  as recorded  in the minutes  of the meetings  of the Shari'ah  Board.






501





Sharr'ah  Standard  Na (18):  Possession (Qabd)





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Realisation  of Possession in the Shari'ah
■  The basis  for the realisation of actual  possession with  respect to gold, silver  and  currencies  through  actual physical possession  is   the sound tradition  reported  from Ubadah  Ibn  Al-Samit  (may Allah be pleased with him),  that the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him),  said,  "Gold for gold,  silver for silver..." till he said,  "like for like,  equal for equal, from hand to hand.  If these species differ,  then sell as you like as long as it  is from hand  to hand".
■  The basis  for acknowledging custom (Urf)  as the basis  for the realisation of possession   is the consensus (Ijma)  of the Jurists  (Fuqaha).It  is  in this regard that  Al-Khatib  Al-Shirbini  says:  "The reason  is  that the Law• giver has used  the term  possession in an unqualified  sense  and  has deemed  it  the basis  of rules.  He did  not elaborate  it, and  there  is  no definition  for it in the language.  It is  for this reason that recourse is  to be  had to custom (Urf)".Ibn Taymiyyah  said, "As long as there is  no definition  for it in the language or in the Shari'.ah,  recourse must be had to the custom of the people,  like  possession mentioned  in the words of: the Prophet  (peace be upon him): He who  buys food is  not to  sell  it until he takes possession  of it?9 AL-Khattabi says:  "Forms of possession differ for things in accordance with a difference in their own forms and in accordance with the varying practices of the people  with respect to
them."(9
The  basis for the  realisation  of possession  in  immoveable  property through   relinquishment  is  customary  practice.  The  opinion  of the

(2)  Related   by Muslim  in his "Sahih.
(3)  "Maughni AL-Muhtaj" [2:  72].
(4)  Majm Al-Fatawa" by  Ibn  Taymiyyah  [3: 272] (5)  "Maalim AI-Sunan Li AL-Khattabr",  [3:  136].



502





Sharr'ah  Standard  Na (18):  Possession (Qabd)

majority  of the  jurists  among   the  Hanafis,  Malikis,  Shafi'is,  Hanba• lis and  Zahiris,  as well  as others  besides  them,   is that  possession  in immoveable  property  is delivered  through  relinquishment  and  the facilitating of transactions in it." Hanafi jurists  have stipulated that  if a lock  is placed  on  the  immoveable property,   then,  it is sufficient  for the  delivery of possession  to  deliver  the  key along  with  relinquish• ment  so as to provide  the  facility  to the possessor to open  it without difficulty.
The basis for considering  registration of immoveable property as construc•
tive  possession  in the case of mortgage  (Rahn)  is  custom  and its practice (in  countries  that  have adopted  the  system  of registration  of property) whereby  registration   of mortgage  of immovable  property   by  entry  in a page ct the register ct mortgages  is  deemed  delivery of possession  un• der the law  (constructive  possession)  and it acts as a substitute  for actual
delivery  of possession  with  respect  to  its legal  effects  and  results.  'This applies even if the property  has in it  the household  assets of the tenant  or is  attached  to the rights of the lessor  over this property,  because in such a case too they are considered  possession  constructively  and in fact.
• Add to this  the fact that official mortgage grants to the creditor  (mortgagee)
a personal  right over the mortgaged  property, which gives him, as a result ct the death  of the owner or his insolvency. a right  prior to all the credi• tors for the satisfaction  of his claim from this property.
Possession  of Ascertained  Moveable  Property
a  The basis  for the realisation of possession in ascertained moveable  proper• ty, as well  as liabilities by description, through  relinquishment  in favour of one entitled  to it and in a manner that enables him to deliver it without any

(6)  "Al-Fatawa  A!Hindiyyah"  [3:   16];  "Radd  AI-Muhtar"  [4:  561],  passim;  "Rawdat AI• Talibin" [3:  515];  41Majmw Sharh Al-Muhadhdhab"  [9:  276];  "Mawahib AI-Jalil" [4: 477]; "KashshafAl-Qina" [3: 202];  AI-Mughnt [4:  333]  A41-Muhalla" [8: 89]; see article (263)  in "Majallat Al-Ahkam Al-'Adliyyah"; article (435)  in "Murshid AlHayran; and article (335) in Majallat Al-Ahkam Al-Shar'iyyah  'Ala Madhhab Al-Imam Ahmad.
(7)  "Radd AI-Muhtar"  [4:  561];  "AI-Fatawa  Al-Hindiyyah"  [3:  16];  see articles (270)  and
(271)  in "Majallat Al-Ahkam Al-Adliyya'; and articles (435)  and (436)  in Murshid AL•
Hayrar.
(8)  41-Madkhal A!- Fiqhi Al-'Amm  Lil-Zarqa"  [1:  278]  and [2: 648]  marginal note.
(9)  A1-Mudhakkirah Al-Idahiyyah Li Al-Qanun AI-Madani AL-Kuwayti", (P.  339) as quoted
by Muhammad Wahid A!-Din Suwar in his boak on Islamic Fiqh, (P  94)



503





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (18):  Possession  (Qabd)

restriction,  whether  or not the moveable  property  needs to be delivered through  one of the customary units of measure, is  that delivery of a thing literally means delivering it completely without any impediments,  so that no one shares it with the possessor, and this is  possible by relinquishment. Further, the person who is  under an obligation to deliver must have a way through  which  he can be discharged of his  obligation, and what is  in his ability is  to relinquish  it and remove all obstacles.  As for actual  physical possession  (by  hand),  it  is  not  within  his  ability  to provide that  for  it  is a voluntary  act  of taking  possession.  If the  obligation  to  make  such  a delivery is   imposed  on him,  it  would  become difficu1t  for him  to meet such  an obligation.'This  rule,  as well as its basis,  has  been supported  by a resolution of the Islamic Fiqh Academy (0IC),
■  The basis  for considering the registration of pledges  (hypothecation)  of mobile  moveable  property   like cars,  steamers,  airplanes  and  trains  in the official  register  for the beneficiary  (in countries  where a system  of registration  has been  adopted  for such  moveable  property)  is   deemed constructive  possession  for what it represents.  I is  the governing custom that considers official registration as the delivery of constructive  posses• sion to the beneficiary and acts as a substitute for actual possession with respect to its  legal  effects  and consequences.
• The  basis  for stipulating  the ascertainment   (setting  aside)  of moveable property  through  customary  units of measure for the realisation of pos• session are the words of the Prophet  (peace  be upon him):  "He who buys
food  (wheat)   is not  to  sell  it until  he has measured  it"? insofar  as  they
indicate  that possession  in this  case  is not attained  except   by the use of
the  cubic  measure.  Thus,  ascertainment  in what  is  estimated  by cubic measure is  through  cubic measure and the remaining  types are  assigned

(10)  Bada'? AI-Sana'tr"  [5:  244]  A!-Fatawa  Al-Hindiyyah  [3:   16];  "Radd Al-Muhtar
(4:  561];  "Sharh AI-Majallah  Li AI-Atast"  [2:  200 and after];  Al-Mughn"  [4:   111];
4If%ah Li-Ibn Hubayrah" (P.  224);  articles  (272) to (275)  of  "Majallat AL-Ahkam Al•
'Adliyyal; and articles  (437) and (438) in Murshid Al-Hayran"
(H) Resolution No. 53 (4/6)  in its 6 Session (Sha'ban  1410  A.H./March  1990  A.D.).
(1I2)  Related  by Muslim in his "Sahth",  [10:  169];  Abu Dawud  in his "Sunan"  [2: 252]  and
AI-Nasa'i in his "Sunan" [7: 285].



504





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (18):  Possession  (Qabd)

a similar rule on the basis of analogy. This  is  the view of the majority of the Jurists  from among the Malikis,  Shafi 'is and Hanbalis upholding that possession  in things that are estimated by cubic measure, weight, linear measure and counting is attained by taking delivery through these measures accompanied by relinquishment.
The basis for considering the delivery of documents pertaining to commodities,  appliances and goods (like bills of lading and warehouse receipts)  as constituting constructive possession of what they represent is  the customary practice in this respect seeking support from the view of the Malikis  that the mode of possession in moveable property that is not subjected to estimation is  recourse to custom (Ur)" Further, the basis  for  stipulating cubic  measure for  the soundness of  possession in food that is estimated by cubic measure in the tradition from the Prophet (peace be upon him)  is the custom that was prevalent during the period of the Prophet (peace be upon him) to the effect that possession in things subjected to  cubic  measure is   through  cubic measure and for the rest analogy is to be employed. As the determination of the issue of possession in contracts is based on custom, therefore, everything that is  taken by custom to be possession in a certain period is to be deemed as possession from the perspective of the Sharf'ah.  If the custom of the people changes in this  respect,  the consideration  of that  mode  as possession  ceases. The reason is  that where the constructive  basis of  rules  is custom,  the rules will  alter with a change in custom,    except for  those things that have been specified   by the Shari'ah.  As fr  as  the custom prevalent in our times is  based upon the consideration of the delivery of documents for moveable commodities and goods -even where these are subjected to estimation- as amounting to possession of these commodities and goods, it will be deemed valid from the perspective of the Shari'ah. The basic principle here is  what is stated by  Al-Wansharisi, "A thing that is  acted upon by the people  and is preferred  by their custom and practice must

(13)  "Maughni AI-Muhtaj" [2:   173];  "Kashshaf Al-Qina" [3:  201];  and Ibn  Qudamah,  "Al
Mughnt" [4:  I11].
(14)   Sharh  AL-Khirashr"  [5:   158];  AI-Dardir,  AlSharh  Al-Kabir  [3:  145];  and  A!-Baj,
A1-Muntaqa" [6:  97].
(15)   A1-Mughn"  [6:   188];  AI-Furuq"  [1:   176];  and  Al-Qarafi,   Al-Jhkam  Fi Tamyiz AL• Fatawa '#n AL-Ahkam", (P.  231).



505





Sharf 'ah  Standar d N (18):  Po ssession (Qabd)

be accommodated through the  Shari'ah even  against disagreement and opposition,  as far as possible"(6
The basis for  considering prior possession of a certain thing as a substitute
for subsequent possession on grounds that are acknowledged  by the  Shari'ah, when it represents it, is that the purpose behind the realisation  of possession is  to establish  control  over, and the ability to undertake transactions in,  the thing possessed. Ifthis state is found possession  is found too. This is based  on what is upheld   by the Malikis  and Hanbalis to the effect that if a person sells a thing, or gives it away as gift or pledges it, while the thing is in the possession  of a usurper, borrower, bailee, hirer, agent or another, then prior possession represents  absolutely subsequent  entitled  possession through the contract, irrespective  of the nature of possession exercised by the possessor being that of liability or trust  and irrespective  of the entitled possession being in the nature of trust or liability.  As for what arises from this  with respect to the possessor being liable for the thing possessed or holding it as a trustee, it has no connection with or effect upon the reality of possession.(
Expenses of Possession
a  The basis for the view that the expenses  of possession of the sold commo• dity are borne by the  seller  is that the delivery  of the  sold commodity is obligatory on the seller  by virtue of the contract, and the contract is  not completed without it;  and a thing without  which an obligation cannot be fulfilled  is also obligatory. Accordingly, this  is what was upheld by the  ma• jority of the Jurists to the effect that meeting the expenses of the delivery of the sold commodity -by presenting it if it is absent and by ascertaining it if it needs to be ascertained by a customary unit of measure- is the  responsi• bility  of the  seller.  The  basis for the view that expenses,  if any,  of taking delivery of  the price are the responsibility  of the  buyer,  is that payment of the price to the seller is  obligatory upon the  buyer,  thus,  it is  binding on him to bear the burden of  all that is  required by such  delivery. The basis for qualifying this rule to impose the expenses on both parties insofar as there

(16)  Al-Wansharisi,  "AIMryar" [6:  471].
(17)   "Mayyarah   'Ala  AI-Thfah"  [I:    IIH];   "Bidayat  AI-Mujtahd"  [2:   229];   Majd  Ibn
Taymiyyah,  "A1-Muharrar",  [I:  374];  Ibn Taymiyyah,  "Nazariyyat Al'Aqd", (P  236) "Kashshaf Al-Qina"  [3:  249 and 373],  [4:  253];  and Al-Qarafi,   "Sharh  Tanqih  A!• Fusu!"  (P. 456).



506





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (18):  Possession  (Qabd)

is no condition  to the contrary, is extended from the ruling of the majority of the Jurists of upholding conditions.  As for the qualification that "there is no custom to the contrary, it is based on the view of the Jurists, insof r as it is stated in their texts that if there is a stipulation or custom to the contrary, then,  it is  binding to follow such  stipulation or custom."
The  basis for  the buyer bearing  the expenses  of constructive  possession
of what  he  has  purchased,  as represented  by  official  registration   and attestation  for the sale of immoveable property  or its mortgage in countries that  have  adopted  a system  of registration   of transfer  of immoveable property.,  as  well as  the  sale  of some  mobile  moveable  property.  like cars,  vehicles,  steamers  and airplanes  or their pledging  (hypothecation) in countries   that  have  adopted  a system  of officially  registering  such things,  and  as  well as the  purchase  of shares  of corporations  -whose trading  is  permissible according to the Shari'ah  in markets  for financial paper-   is   the  customary  practice   in  all  these  things.   Further,   such a practice  secures the interest  of the buyer and  is  supported  by the rule that  gain  is  linked  to  the  bearing  of expenses.  It is  also  supported  by derivation   of the  rule  from  what  has been  stated  by the  Hanafi  Jurists to the effect that the expenses  of the drafting  of documents,  promissory notes and of witnessing, which confirm the transaction of sale,  are to be borne  by  the buyer  as  long as there  is no custom  or stipulation  to the contrary.
• The basis for the seller  bearing  the expenses  for the delivery of the sold commodity  to  the  buyer  with  the  stipulation   of a known  place  (other than  the place of contract  where it is  present)  is  what has been stated  by the Hanafis and the Hanabalis  affirming that such expenses  are borne by the seller in case of a stipulation  to this effect.!

(18)   Al-Zurqan  'la Khalil" [5:   158};  "Hashiyat AL-Dusuqi  [3:  144];  "AI- Bahjh  'Ala Al• Thfal  [2:   144];   A!-Dardir,   "A1-Sharh  Al- Saghir"   [3:   197];   "Al-Maughn"  [6:   188]; "Sharh Muntaha  Al-Iradat"  [2:  192]  "Mughni Al-Muhtaf [2:  73]; "Bada T' AI-Sana1" [5:  243]; Al-Atasi,  Sharh  Al-Majallal"  [2:  221];  articles  (45-242)  in  Majallat  Al• Ahkam 'Ala Madhhab Al-Imam  Ahmad;  articles (288-91)  in "Majallat Al-Ahkam Al•
'Adliyya;  and articles (67-466) in Murshid Al-Hayran".
(19)   "Durar Al-Hukkam"  [3: 230]; "Kashshaf Al-Qina" [3:  180];  "Sharh Muntaha  A-Iradat"
(2:   161];  articles (353),   (446)  in Murshid  AL-Hayran';  article (287)  in  "Majallat  AL• Ahkam Aal-Adliyyah';  and article  (342)  in  Majallat  AI-Ahkam  Al-Shar'iyyah  'la
Madhhab AI-Imam Ahmad".



507





Sharr'ah  Standard  Na (18):  Possession  (Qabd)

Expenses  of Possession  in Qard  (Loan)
The  basis for the borrower bearing the expenses of delivery and acquisition, which  refer to taking of  delivery through  customary  units  of  measure in a contract of Qard,  is  that the lender  has undertaken  a good act,  and costs are not  to  be imposed  on one who does a good  act Linked  to these with respect to the rule  are the expenses of the drawing up of documents, promissory  notes and  so  on,  which are matters  that  are  needed  for the implementation,  execution  or verification of the contract of Qard (loan),  it is the borrower who bears these costs  insofar as these are the requirements or  appendages of raising a loan,  which is  for his  interest.  The  lender  is undertaking an act of  donation of the benefits of his wealth and the person doing good is  not to be made to bear costs over and above his granting of a thing because "No ground (of complaint)  can there be against those who do good!  If it is  made binding on him to bear the costs of lending  and recovery as well as attestation, it would run counter to his good act, and it would lead  to the preventing to those who own wealth from  lending  it.
Expenses of Possession  in Deposit  (Bailment)
The basis  for the depositor  bearing  the costs of  deposit  and recovery in a  contract  of Ida' (deposit)  is  that  "The  burden  of possession  on  each thing  is  binding  upon  the one who benefits from  its  possession,  due to the principle:  Gains are based on the bearing of costs"022  It is  known that  the benefit in deposit  and  its  return  belong to the depositor  alone, thus,  the expenses that are incurred  on its  deposit  and recovery are  bin• ding  upon him.9

Key Modern Applications of Possession
The basis  for  considering  the possession  of a bank  draft or  a personal cheque,  accepted for payment by the drawee, as constructive possession of

(20)  A1Zarqani  'Ala  Khalil  [5:   158];   AI-Dardir,   "A-Sharh  AI-Sa ghir"  [3:   197];   and
"Hashiyat AI-Dusuqi" [3:  144].
(21)  [AITawbah  (Repentance):  91]. (22)  "Durar Al-Hukam"  [2: 333].
(23)  "AI-Bahr  Al-Ra 'ia"  [7:  276];  "Durar  AL-Hukkam"  [2:   272];  "AL-Mughnr  [9.  269]; "Kashshaf AL-Qina" [4:  203]  Asma Al-Matalb" [3:  84];  "Tuhfat Al-Muhtar  [7:  12 4]; A1-Muhalla" [8:  278]; articles (793)  in Majallat Al-Ahkam AI-Adliyya'; and articles
(1340)  in Majallat Al-Ahkam AI-Shar'iyyah  'Ala Madhhab Al-Imam Ahmad".



508





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (18):  Possession  (Qabd)

the amount accepted is customary banking practice and trading transac• tions in this respect.  The confirmation of this is laid down in a resolution of the International Islamic Fiqh Academy.
• The basis for considering  a payment  on a credit card as constructive possession  of the  amount   of repayment  is   banking  practice  in  this respect.  Likewise,  in  the  consideration   of a deposit  by  a person  of an amount in a bank account of the client, irrespective of this being cash, a bank endorsement, or a cheque accepted for payment by the drawee bank, as constructive possession by the beneficiary. This has been confirmed by a resolution of the International  Islamic Fiqh Academy.99




































(24)  Resolution  No.  (53) 4/6 in its 6 Session (Sha'ban  1410  A.H./March  1990  A.D.).
(25)  25 Resolution  No. (53)  4/6)  in its 6 Session.



509





Sharr'ah  Standard  Na  (18):  Possession (Qabd)





Appendix (C)
Definitions


Al-'Aqar  (Immoveable  Property)
It is something that has a permanently affixed foundation  and  it  is not possible to transfer  it or move it,  along with the subsistence  of its  shape  and form,  like land  and houses.

Al-Manqul  (Moveable  Property)
It  is  something that  can be transferred  and  moved.  Thus,  it includes cash, loans, animals, cars, ships, airplanes, trains, things subjected  to cubic measure  or weight.
Bay' Al-Juzaf (Sale by Random Estimate)
It  is the sale  ofi something  whose precise quantity  is  not known,  and  its quantity is  known through  estimation  without  employing a cubic measure, weight,  linear measure,  count.

Al-Qabd Bi-Sifat AI-Daman  (Possession Creating a Liability for Return)

It is  the acquisition of a thing that leads to the liability for the return  ofi the thing,  if it is a fungible commodity,  that is,  its  return  to its  owner as long  as the thing exists,  and its value, if it is  non-fungible, on its  loss or conversion, whatever the cause of this,  and this when it occurs without  the permission of the owner (as  a wrongful  act,  delict, tort),  like the possession by a thief or usurper, or with the permission of the owner, but with the intention of owning it,  like  the possession of one bargaining for it  or one who has expressed the intention  to own it. Some  Jurists  have deemed the possession by the borrower, the mortgagee (pledge),  lessor  and the independent  contractor  to be of this nature.

AI-Qabd  Bi-Sifat Al-Amanah (Possession  Creating  a Trust)

It is  the acquisition ofi a thing that leads to its  treatment  as a trust  in the possession  of the  possessor  insofar  as  he does not  bear the liability of its



510





Sharr'ah  Standard  Na (18):  Possession (Qabd)

loss,  and as long as he has not committed  a tort  or negligence  in its safe• keeping.  This occurs  with  the  permission  of the owner  when  there  is  no intention  to own it rather  it is for the interest  of the owner, like the bailee, agent, dedicated servant, Wali and Wasi, or it is for the interest of the person acquiring  it,  like the tenant, borrower, and mortgagee, or for their common interest,  like the Mudarib, partner,  tenant  and irrigator.

'Urf (Custom)

It  is  what is  practised  by the people and what they have come to follow in terms of words, acts or relinquishment. The 'Urf that is acknowledged  by the Shari'ah  is  the one that meets the following conditions:
1.  That  it  should  not  contradict the  Sharf'ah.  If the  'Urf  goes  against a Shar'iah  Text or one of the principles  of the Shari'ah,  it is a custom that is  void.
2.  That the 'Urf should be continuous or predominantly so.

3. That  the  'Urf  be prevalent  at  the  time  of  the  undertaking  cf the transaction.
4. That  the two parties  to the contract  should  not have expressly stip• ulated  against  it.  If they  express  such  a stipulation the  'Urf  is  not admissible.

























511


























Shariah Standard No. (19)



Loan (Qard)












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page

Pref:ilce...................................................................................................        517
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................       518
1.  Scope   of the Standard..............................................................................       518
2.  Definition ofQard..................................................................................       518
3.  Elements  (Arkan)  of a Loan (Qard)  Contract and Its Conditions...       518
4.  Rules for  Excess Benefit Stipulated in the Qard Contract...................       518
5.  Rules for Excess Benefit Not Stipulated  in the Contract............       519
6  Stipulation  of a Period in Qard...........................................................       519
7.  Stipulation of a Contract in Qard...........................................................       519
8.  Stipulation cf a Reward for Raising Loans  for Another..............       519
9.  Service Charges fJT Qard..........................................................................       520
10.  Key Modern  Applications  of Qard..........................................................       520
11. Date   of Issuance of the Standard.............................................................       522
Adoption of: the  Standard......................................................................       523
Appendices
Appendix (a):   Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard...............       524
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard.....................................       526
Appendix (c):   Definitions..............................................................................       533
















515








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE  ALL-MERCIFUL,  THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household  and all his companions





Preface


This standard aims to elaborate the rules of the Shari'ah for loan (Qard). Among these are the rules for a benefit (Manfa'ah) arising from a loan whether or  not this  is stipulated (in  the contract), just as it includes the regulations of  the  Shari'ah  that  must  be  followed by  Islamic   financial  institutions (Institution/Institutions)."Likewise, the Standard includes the Shari'ah rules
for some applications that the institutions need to implement, like current accounts, perquisites in return for loans, service charges for loans, and mutual overdrafts between the institution and its correspondents.

























(1) The word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer,  in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



517





Shani'ah Standard  No.  (19):  Loan (Qard)





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers loans and the accompanying benefits or costs irrespective  of the institution  being  a lender  or a borrower.

The Standard  does not cover what  is  not a loan  (Qard),  like the price in a credit sale and investment  accounts, because they have standards specific to them.
2. Definition  of Qard

Qard is the transfer of ownership  in fungible wealth to a person  on whom it is binding  to return  wealth similar  to it.
3. Elements (Arkan) of a Loan  (Qard)  Contract and Its Conditions

3/1   The contract of loan  (Qard)  is  concluded through offer and acceptance by the use of the words Qard  and Salaf or any other  word or act that conveys the meaning of Qard.

3/2  The legal capacity for making  a donation is stipulated for the lender.

3/3 The legal capacity to undertake transactions is stipulated  for the borrower.

3/4  It  is stipulated for the subject-matter of the contract  that it be known fungible  (Mithli)  marketable  wealth.

3/4/1  The borrower   comes  to own the  subject-matter of Qard  (the wealth loaned)  through  possession, and he becomes  liable for (the repayment  of) a similar  subject-matter.

3/4/2  The  applicable  rule  is  the return  of an amount  similar  to the loan amount  at the place where it was delivered.

4. Rules for Excess Benefit  Stipulated in the Qard  Contract

4/1   The  stipulation  of an  excess  for  the  lender  in  loan  is prohibited, and it amounts  to Riba,  whether the excess is  in terms  of quality  or



518





Shari'ah  Standard Na (19):  Loan (Qard)

quantity or whether  the  excess is  a tangible thing or a benefit,  and whether  the excess is  stipulated at the time  cf the contract or while determining the period of delay for satisfaction  or during  the period of delay and,  further,  whether the stipulation is in writing or is part of customary practice.

4/2  It is permissible to stipulate  the satisfaction (repayment)  ofQard at a place other  than  that where the loan  was made.
5.Rules for Excess Benefit  Not  Stipulated in the Contract

5/1  It   is   not  permissible  to  the borrower   to  offer  tangible  property   or extend a benefit to the lender during  the period of the Qard when this is  done for the sake of Qard, unless giving of such benefits is  a practice continuing among the parties from a time prior to the contract cf Qard.

5/2 An excess over Qard  is permissible in terms  of quantity or quality, or offering of tangible  property or extending of a benefit,  at the time of satisfaction  when it is not stipulated or is part of custom, irrespective of the subject-matter of Qard  being cash or kind.

6. Stipulation  of a Period in Qard

It is permissible  to stipulate a period  in Qard. The borrower  is, therefore, under  no obligation to return  it prior to the termination of the period  nor can the lender demand  it back prior to the end of the period.  If,  however, no period   is  stipulated,  it  is  binding   upon  the  borrower   to return   its substitute  (Badal) on demand.

7. Stipulation of a Contract  in Qard

It is  not  permissible to stipulate  a contract of Bay'  (exchange,  sale) er
ljarah  or other  commutative  contract within  the contract  of Qard.

8. Stipulation of a Reward for Raising Loans for Another

It is permissible to stipulate a reward  for  raising loans  for  another  as long as it is not a fictional device (Hilah) for dealing in Riha.  [see item 8/3/2 of Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (15) on Ju'alah  at the end cf which  it is stated "with the  condition that the  transactions  are not employed  for raising  interest bearing loans through  stipulations, customary  practice  cc dealings among Institutions"]



519





Shan'ah Standard No (19):  Loan (Qard)

9. Service Charges for Qard

9/1   It is permissible to a lending institution  to charge for services rendered in  loans  equivalent  to  the  actual  amount  directly  spent  on  such services.  It is  not permissible  to the institution  to charge an amount in excess of such a service charge.  All charges in excess  of the actual amount  spent are prohibited,  and it  is  necessary to ensure precision in the determination  of the actual charges so that they do not lead  to an excess that can be deemed a benefit. The fundamental  rule is  that each loan  bears its own specific charges,  unless this  becomes difficult as in the case of a group or common  loan, in which case there is  no restriction  in the way of bearing direct collective charges for all the loans  on the basis of the entire sum.  It  is  necessary that the method cf determining  the charges be laid  down by the Shari'ah  Supervisory
Board of the institution  in detail,  and this  is  to be done by distributing
the expenses incurred  among all the loans  and each loan  is  to bear its share proportionately.. An explanation of such circumstances  is  to be presented before the Board along with suitable documents.

9/2  Indirect  expenses  incurred   in rendering  services for loans are not included   in  actual  expenses,   like  the  salaries  of the  employees, the rentals of space,  assets and  means  of transport  as well  as other management  and general expenses of the institution.
10. Key Modern  Applications of  Qard

Among the most important modern applications of Qard are the following:

10/1  Current accounts

10/ I/ 1The reality of current accounts is that these are loans and not deposits.  Thus,  the  institution  comes  to own  the  amounts and a liability to repay the amount  is established against it.
10/1/2It  is permissible  for the institution  to demand wages for ser•
vices rendered  to the holders of the current  accounts.

10/1/3It is permissible  for the institution to render services related  to deposits and withdrawals to the owners of the current accounts with  or without  compensation  like  chequebooks  and  ATM cards  and the like.  There is  no restriction  on the institution



520





Shari' ah Standard Na (19):  Loan (Qard)

if it  distinguishes  between  owners  of current  accounts  with respect to what relates to deposits and withdrawals, like exclusive  booths  for  receiving  the owners of some accounts, or like distinguishing between the types or cheques.

10/2  Perquisites for Qard

It is not  permitted to the  institution to present  to the  owners  of current  accounts,  in lieu of such accounts,  material  gifts,  financial incentives, services or benefits that are not related to deposits and withdrawals.  Among  these are exemptions from charges in whole or in part, like exemption from  credit card charges, deposit  boxes, transfer charges and letters  of guarantee and credit.

The perquisites and incentives  that are not specific to current accounts are not governed  by this  rule.

10/3  Charges on credit cards  for cash  withdrawals from ATMs

10/3/1 The charges imposed on cards for cash withdrawals from bank teller machines  are a charge for services and are independent of the loan.

10/3/2  It is  necessary  that the charges imposed  on credit cards for cash withdrawals  from bank  teller machines  be  an amount that   is    certain   within   the   limits   of  reasonable   charges excluding  profit  from  Qard.  It  is  not permissible  to link the
charge to the amount  withdrawn.  It is  not permissible to the institution to slice the withdrawals  as a device for obtaining repeated charges just as it is not permissible (for this purpose) to take into account  the period  of repayment  of the amount withdrawn.  Where  there  is   a difference  in currencies,  the application  of the rate for the prevailing currency  is stipulated.
[see  also item  4/5,  Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (2) on Credit  and
Charge Cards I

10/4  Overdrafts between the institution  and its correspondents

In order  to  avoid  interest   between   the  institution  and  its  cor•
respondents,  there  is no  restriction  if the  institution  comes  to



521





Shan'ah Standard  No (19):  Loan (Qard)

an agreement  with other correspondent  banks to place a ceiling upon the overdrafts  of one drawn upon  the  other  without  any claims for profits (interest). [See item 2/4/a of Shari'ah Standard No.  (1) on Trading in Currencies]

I 1. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 30 Rabi' I,  1425 A.H., corresponding to 19
May 2004 A.D.













































522





Shari' ah Standard Na (19):   Loan (Qard)





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Standard on Qard was adopted by the Sharl'ah Board in its meeting No.  (12)  held in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah  during the period of 26-30 Rabi  I,  1425  A.H.,  corresponding  to 15-19  May 2004 A.D.












































523





Shan'ah Standard  No. (19):  Loan (Qard)





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No.  (8) held in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah  during  the period  of 28 Safar to 3 Rabi' I,  1423  A.H.,  corresponding to 6-11  May 2002
A.D.,  the  Shari'ah  Board  decided  to  issue  the  Shari'ah  Standard  on  Qard
(loan).

On  24 Rajab  1423  A.H.,  corresponding  to  1     October  2002 A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Standards Committee  decided to commission  a Shari'ah consultant to prepare an exposure draft on the Shari'ah  Standard  on Loan  (Qard).

In its  meeting No.  (7)  held in the Kingdom of Bahrain  on 16  Muharram
1424 A.H., corresponding to  19 March  2003 A.D., the Shari'ah  Standards Committee   (1)  discussed  the Shari'ah  study  and  required  the  consultant to  incorporate  necessary  amendments   in the light of the  discussions  and observations  of the members.

In  its  meeting  No.  (8)   held  in  the  Kingdom  cf  Bahrain  during  the period  of 16-17  April 2003 A.D., the  Shari'ah  Standards  Committee   (1) discussed the exposure  draft f the standard  on Qard and made necessary
amendments  in the  light  of the  discussions  and  the  observations  of the
members.  The Committee  discussed  the exposure  draft of the standard  in its meeting held on 25 and 26 Rabi' II,  1424  A.H.,  corresponding to 25  and
26 June  2003 A.D.,  and incorporated  necessary amendments in the light of the discussions  and observations  of the members.
The  Committee   discussed  the  exposure  draft  of the standard   in   its meeting  No. (9)  held  it Amman,  the  Hashimite  Kingdom  of Jordan,  on
23  and  24  Jumada  I,   1424  A.H.,  corresponding  to  23  and  24 July  2003
A.D., and made necessary amendments  in the light of the discussions  and observations  of the members.



524





Shari' ah Standard Na (19):   Loan (Qard)

The  revised  exposure  draft  cf the Shari'ah  Standard  was  presented  to the Shari'ah  Board  in its meeting No  (11) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah during   the  period   of  2-8  Ramadan   1424   A.H.,   corresponding   to  27
October-2  November  2003  A.D. The Shari'.ah  Board made amendments to the exposure draft of the standard  and decided that it be sent to specialists and interested parties  in order to obtain their comments  in preparation  for the discussion  of the exposure  draft in a public hearing.

A public hearing was held in the Kingdom of Bahrain  on 29 Dhul-Qadah
1424 A.H., corresponding to 21  January 2004 A.D. The public hearing was attended by more than fifteen participants  representing  central banks, institutions, accounting firms, Shari'ah scholars, academics and others interested  in the field.  The members  of the Shari'.ah  Standards  Committees (1) and (2),  responded  to the written  comments  that were sent prior to the public hearing  as well  as to the oral comments  that were expressed  in the public hearing.

The  Sharf'ah  Standards  Committees   (1)  and  (2)  in a joint  meeting  in the  Kingdom  of Bahrain  on  30  Dhul-Qaldah  1424  A.H.,  corresponding to 22  January  2004  A.D.,  discussed  the comments  that were made during the  public  hearing  as well as the  observations   received  in  writing.  The Committees  made amendments that were deemed  suitable.

The amended  exposure  draft was presented  to the Drafting  Committee in  its  meeting  held  in the  Kingdom  of Bahrain  on  25  Safar  1425  A.H., corresponding  to 15  April 2004 A.D.

The  Shari'ah  Board  in its  meeting  No.  (12)  held  in Al-Madinah  Al• Munawwarah  during the period of 26-30 Rabi' I,   1425  A.H.,  corresponding to 15-20  May 2004 A.D., discussed the amendments  suggested by the Shari'ah Standards Committee and the Drafting Committee, and incorporated the amendments   deemed  suitable.  The  Sharf'ah  Board  unanimously  adopted some of the items of the Standard and some items were adopted by the majority vote of the members of the Shari'ah  Board,  as recorded in the minutes of the meetings cf the Shari'ah  Board.







525





Shani'ah Standard  No (19):  Loan (Qard)





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


■  The basis for stipulating that wealth  given as Qard be known is  to enable the borrower to return  a similar substitute of the wealth of Qard.
■  The basis for the rule that the borrower  does not come to own the wealth lent except through  possession is  that the contract  of Qard is one in which commutative  aspect and that  of donation  stand  combined,  however,  the act cf donation  is predominant.  It is for this  reason that the rule is  similar to that for gift (Hibah)  in which ownership  is  transferred  with the taking of possession.
■  The basis for the rule that the subject-matter  cf Qard be a fungible item  is
that it is  only such an item that can be returned  by the borrower. Further, fungible  items are compensated  through  similar  substitutes  in usurpa• tion and destruction.
The basis for the obligation of returning  the counter-value  of Qard at the
same place where it was granted,  when there is  no contrary  stipulation,  is that this is  the governing rule.
Stipulation  of an Excess in the Counter-V:alue of Qard
The basis for the prohibition  of stipulating an excess in the counter-value of Qard for the lender  are evidences from the Qur 'an, the Sunn ah, consensus of Fuqaha (ljma)  as well  as rational arguments that convey the prohibition of Riba (usury)  in Qard.
Stipulation  of Repayment  in a Land  (Place)  Other  Than  That  of Qard
• The  basis  fer  the  permissibility  of repayment  in  a  land  other  than  that where Qard was granted so as to provide a facility to the borrower whether or not the lender benefits from this, is as follows:
1.     The  reports from   the  Companions,   may Allah  be pleased  with
them,  which  indicate  the permissibility  of stipulating  repayment  in

(2)  41-Musannaf" by Ibn Abu Shaybah [6: 279] and AI-Sunan Al-Kbra" by A!-Bayhaqi,
[5:  352]



526





Shari' ah Standard Na (19):   Loan (Qard)

a land other than that where Qard was made. This is a view upheld  by the Malikis and the Hanbalis  and it was preferred  by Ibn Taymiyyah and Ibn Al-Qayyim  Al-Jawziyyah.
2.    The  stipulation  of repayment in a land  other  than  that  of the  Qard is  in the  interest  of both  the  lender  and  the  borrower without  cau• sing injury  to either  along with the existence  of a need. The Shari'ah does not lay down the prohibition  of interests  that bear no injury.  In fact it lays down  their  permissibility.  It does prohibit those  that  are injurious, but here the benefit  is mutual  and they are cooperating to arrange  this.  It, therefore,  belongs to the category  of cooperation and participation.
3.   The basic rule in transactions (Mu'amalat)  is  permissibility,  and the stipulation   of repayment of a loan  in a land  other  than  that  of the Qard  is  not  expressly  prohibited  by the  texts,  nor  is   the  meaning expressly  stated  in the  texts  so that  prohibition  could  be extended through  analogy.  Thus, the repayment  falls under  the rule of permis• sibility.

Stipulation of a Period in Qard

The  basis  for  the  permissibility  of  stipulating  a  period   in  Qard,   for Qard  can  be delayed  by  stipulating  a period,  are  evidences   about  the permissibility ofa period  ofdelay, the obligation of abiding  by conditions and  contracts,  for the  realisation  of the  purposes  of the  Qard,  and  for
repelling  injury.

Stipulating a Contract of Sale within the Contract of Qard
■  The bases for the prohibition  of stipulating  a contract of sale within  the contract  of. Qard  are the following:
1. The saying of the Prophet  (peace be upon  him):  "A Salaf (loan) and sale   (in one  contract)  are not  permitted   nor  are  two  conditions   in a sale  nor  the profit from  a  thing for which  the  liability for loss  is not borne  nor the sale of what you do not have"

(3)  Related  by Abu Dawud.  The text of this Hadith  belongs to him as narrated from Abdullah
Ibn Amr Ibn Al-'Ass (may Allah be pleased with him), chapter  on the person  who =



527





Shani'ah Standard  No.  (19):  Loan (Qard)

2.    The  underlying   reasoning   is  that  the  word   Salaf  .in   the  words of the  Prophet  (peace  be  upon  him):  "A   Salaf (loan) and sale  (in one  contract)   are  not  permitted,  means  Qard.  The  Hadith   indi• cates  the  impermissibility   of  combining  a  Qard   and   a  sale  in a single contract.  The generality of its meaning  includes  the imper• missibility  of stipulating  a contract  of sale in a contract  of Qard  as
well  as the  impermissibility  of stipulating  a Qard  contract  within a contract  of sale.
3.     The  stipulation   of a contract  of sale  within  a contract  of Qard  is a means towards  obtaining  an excess in Qard  as he may oblige him with respect  to the  price  for the  sake of Qa.rd,  and  in this  way the Qard will be created with a stipulated excess, which is  Riha.  These are means that,  by agreement,  are to be prevented  and blocked.
4.    The stipulation ct a contract of sale within a contract of Qard removes the  contract  of Qard  from  its  main  purpose,  which  is  to  provide a facility. Tbe reason is  that Qard is  not a commutative  contract,  it is rather  a contract  of piety and virtue;  thus,  it  is   not valid  if compen• sation is  stipulated  in it.  If Qard is  linked to a commutative  contract, it will receive a part  in the compensation  and this  will take  it out of its required  purpose.  This  will nullify it and nullify the commutative
contract linked  to it as  well

• The basis for the prohibition  of  a stipulation  by the lender that the borrower gives  him a gift is  that in reality  this  amounts  to Qard with an excess that is  stipulated  for the benefit of the lender  and this excess is  the gift.  Thus,  it amounts to prohibited  Riba and removes the contract from the category of a compassionate  contract moving it to one ofRiba.  Furtber, this stipulation

=   sells what  he does  not have,  "Kitab A!Buy",  (H: 3504): "Suunan Abu Dawud" [3:  283]; Al-Tirmidhi,  chapter  on  the disapproval of selling what  one does not have,  "Kitab AI• Buy" (H:  1234):  "Sunan Al- Trmidhi [3: 526-27] A!-Nasa 'i, chapter on two conditions in a sale,  "Kitab Al-Buy" (H: 4644):  "Sunan AI-Nasa'i" [7:  340];  Ahmad  in "Muusrad AlMukthirin Min AI-Sahabah" (H: 6633):  "Musnad Ahmad"  [2: 3730]  through different channels,  all of them:  From Ayyub,  who  said:  "Amr Ibn  Shu'ayb  related to me  saying,
'My father related to me  from ..'  till he mentioned  Abdullah Ibn Amr reporting  it'. The Hadith  is deemed  hasan  Hadith,  but  rises  to  the level  af  Sahih Li-ghayrihi due to  its numerous channels.



528





Shari' ah Standard  Na (19):   Loan (Qard)

generates a benefit for the lender and the Jurists have unanimously  agreed that any contract that yields a benefit stipulated for the  lender is  imper• missible.  The benefit in this  stipulation   is that the lender  will benefit from a second loan  from the borrower,  and this benefit is not in lieu of anything other than the very Qard that he gave him.
Stipulation  of a Reward for Raising Loans on the Basis of Credit•
Worthiness
The basis for  permitting the stipulation of a reward for  raising loans  on the basis of credit status is  that this  is a counter-value for  a service rende• red, and this is what is  upheld by the Jurists that a reward may be acquired for  recommendations and lending of status.
Charges  for Services Actually Rendered
The basis for the permissibility of the lender charging  only what is equivalent to the actual  costs incurred is  that these are in lieu ct the costs alone.  The lender is doing a favour and the person doing a favour is not to be penalised. The basis  for  the prohibition  of charging in excess  of this  is  that in such a case  it would amount to an  excess  in lieu ct the Qard.  Resolution  No.  13
(1/3) was issued by the International Islamic Fiqh Academy (OIC) regarding
the recovery of  actual  costs.

Material Benefits at the Time of Repayment That Are Not Stipulated
• The basis for  the permissibility of giving an excess,  in terms of quantity or quality,  at the time of repayment by way of generosity and goodwill, when these are neither stipulated nor is there a practice of paying them, is  the Hadith  reported from Abu Rafi, may Allah be pleased   with  him, that the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him)  borrowed a very young camel from a man and then wished to present to him one of the camels of the Sadaqah (Zakat),  so he asked Abu Rafi' to repay the man his camel. Abu Rafi' returned it  to him and said,  '1  do not find anything  there ex• cept a full grown four year old camel."  The Prophet (peace be upon him) said,  "Give  him  this  camel.  The  best people  are those  who  do  better  in of
repayment"." It is  reported from Abu Hurayrah that a man  came  to the

(4)  Related  by Muslim   inhis Sahih" in the Book of "Musaqat", chapter on the person who borrows  may return  what  is better.



529





Shani'ah Standard  No (19):  Loan (Qard)

Messenger  of Allah (peace  be upon  him)  seeking  alms.  The  Messenger of Allah  (peace  be upon  him)  borrowed  food  amounting to one-half  of a Wasq  and  gave the  man  this.  When  the  lender  came  demanding his loan,  he gave him a full Wasq saying,  "One-half of this  is your repayment
and the other half is  a present from  me.°

Material Benefits Not Stipulated  Prior to Repayment
The basis for the prohibition of material benefits  not stipulated prior  to repayment,  unless  these  benefits  are not  for the  sake of Qard  or  in lieu thereof,  are the following:
1.    From  Anas  Ibn  Malik,  may  Allah  be pleased  with  him,  who  said:
"The  Messenger  of Allah  (peace be upon  him)  said,  'When one of you grants  a Qard  and  a gift is  made  to  him  by the borrower or  he offers him a free ride on his animal, he is not to accept this from him, unless such a practice was prevalent among them prior to the Qard"8
2.    Reports  of precedents  laid down  by the Companions, may Allah be pleased  with  them,  which  indicate the  prohibition  of accepting  the gift of the  borrower  and  other  types  of benefits,  unless  there  is  an evidence  that this is  not for the sake of the loan, and that the  lender responds  with a similar  gift or adjusts  it as repayment of the debt.

Current Accounts
a  'The  basis  for the  determination  that  current  accounts   constitute  loans
(Qurud), are the following:
I.  That the bank comes to own the deposits in the current accounts and has the right to undertake transactions  in the amounts and to seek growth in them (through  investment).  Further,  it  is under an obligation to return a similar amount  on demand.  This is  the very meaning  of Qard, which is  the giving of wealth to one who benefits from it -that  is,  employs it and consumes  it  in pursuit  of his aims- and then  returns  its  counter• value.  This differs  from Wadi'ah  (deposit)  in  the terminology  of Fiqh, which is wealth deposited with a person for safe-custody so that he does not employ the wealth and returns this very wealth to the owner.

(5)  Related  by A!-Bayhaqi,  4l-Sunan  Al-Kubra",  [5:  351]. (6)  Related   by Ibn  Majah in his Sunan" (H:  2457).



530





Shari' ah Standard Na (19):  Loan  (Qard)

2.    It is  binding  on the bank to return  a similar amount  on demand  for the current  deposit,  and it guarantees  such return  even upon  loss  of the wealth, whether  or not it was negligent. This is the purpose  of the contract  of Qard,  as  against  Wadi'ah  in Fiqh terminology insofar  as the Wadi'ah  is  a trust  in the possession  of the custodian,  thus,  if it is destroyed  due to his transgression  or negligence,  he is  held liable for it, but if it is destroyed  without  such transgression or negligence, he is not liable. Resolution  No. 86 (3/9) was issued by the International Is• lamic Fiqh Academy  (OIC)  regarding the status of current  accounts.
The  basis for  the permissibility of the bank  demanding service  charges
-for maintaining current  accounts- for the services rendered, is an excess over the duty owed by it,  because  it  is  entitled  to such charges  in lieu ct the acts undertaken by it and services rendered  to the dient.
■ The basis for the permissibility ct the owner of a current  account  utilising
a chequebook and ATM card without  compensation are the following:
1.     The additional benefit  arising  out  of this  issue  is  common  for both parties -the  lender and the borrower-  as both  benefit  from  it,  thus, both benefits  are set off against  each other.  In fact, the  benefit  that goes to the client through  the issuance of a chequebook and an ATM card is secondary  and is  not a primary  benefit insofar as the bank has set up this system for serving  its own numerous aims  and objectives, thus,  the benefit  accruing  to the bank from this system  is a primary
benefit,  while the  realisation  of the  benefit  for  the  client  from  this
system  is  a consequence  of the  employment  of this  system  by the
bank for  its aims and objectives.
2.    The benefit  derived  by the owner  of a current  account  -the lender• from  this  system  without  a counter-value  is  not  a benefit  separate from  the Qard.  In fact, it is  a means  for the satisfaction of the loans acquired  by the bank insofar as  these  are  ways for the repayment  of loans for every lender  as when he demands  them.
■  The  basis  for the prohibition  of presents and gifts,  when the underlying cause  is  Qard,  insofar  as the bank gives these  presents and  gifts to one who gives it a Qard, is  that these  are by way of gifts to the lender prior to



531





Shan'ah Standard  No (19):  Loan (Qard)

the satisfaction of the loan when these are due to the Qard.As for the basis of presents and  gifts in general, they are not related to Qard and there is no suspicion about them
Overdrafts between the Institutions and Their Correspondents
The basis  for the permissibility of overdrafts between institutions  and their correspondents  is  general need and that the benefit derived from this practice is not specific to the lender alone.  In fact,  the benefit is mu• tual.  Further, it does not fill under the category of Qard rather it is a step for transacting  with one who deals with you.  'Thus, the issue does not resemble the case of "You give me a loan and I will give you a loan.\
































(7)  Resolution No. (355) of the Shari'ah  Board of Al Rajhi Banking Corporation  was issued
with respect  to presents and gifts in lieu of loans (Qurud).
(8)  4l-Mughn"  by   Ibn  Qudamah,  [6:  436];  Resolutions  and  Recommendations  of Al
Baraka,  No.  (8/10)  and (11/6);  Sharl'ah  Rulings on economic  Matters,  issued  by  Bayt
AI-Tamwil  AL-Kuwayti,  [1:   178].



532





Shari' ah Standard Na (19):  Loan (Qard)





Appendix (C)
Definitions


Benefit  Arising from  Qard
It is  a benefit  or an interest  that is  derived  by the lender  in a contract of
Qard  due to this contract. Current Accounts
These are loans  that constitute  the current accounts  insofar  as the bank
comes  to own  these  amounts   and  it  is  possible  for  the  owner  of these accounts  to withdraw  these amounts at any time he likes.

Mithlis  (Fungibles)

These are cash, things subjected  to cubic measure, weight, linear measure and very similar  countable  things  that  do not differ to an extent that their difference  will lead to a difference  in their value.

Qimis  (Non-Fungibles)
These  are types  of wealth  whose  difference,  one from  another,  leads  to
a difference  in their value,  as in the case of animals. Legal Capacity for Donation
It is  the  ability  of the  subject  (Mukallaf)   to grant  wealth  or a benefit
to another in  the  present   or in the  future  without compensation  in lieu thereof and with the usual  intention  of piety and  the doing  of good.

Legal Capacity to Undertake Transactions

It is  the ability of a person  to commit  an act or to issue  a statement   in a manner that is acknowledged by the Shari'ah, and the underlying basis is discretion,  reason  and puberty.

Deficient Legal Capacity for Execution
It is the ability ct a person to undertake  certain transactions  and not others
so that the execution of such transactions depends upon ratification by another.



533























