Standard No.  (21)



Financial  Paper
(Shares and Bonds)












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page

Pref ace    "fii .. i i,i,ji,i•i•--···..•·i<i  i           ,.i       i11l'I  ••,,i                        ,."-, .. ii 1-. ••.,. ••.• --;;;                                          , .. ,       i·•••·••·i"ii   i·i11illi·i•·<i•·ti••·•·           ,...                            559
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        560
I.  Scope of the Standard ...........so. so.s o s.s o.so .s o.so. s o.so s . s o... .....          56
2.  Rules for Issuance cf Shares................................................................       560
3.  Rules for Dealing in Shares  ..     ...•.....                                                 562
4.  Rules for Issuance of Bonds .......sos.ss.so s»sos»s os»s ssss«so s« sos«s os»s os.s ass.                     567
5.  Ihe  Rule for Trading in Bonds...........so..so.so.sos.so.ooooo.so.so.....        568
6. Shari'ah  Substitute for Bonds..................................................................    568

7.  Date of Issuance cl the Standard............................................................        568
Adoption  rt the Standard......................................................................        569
Appendices
Appendix  (a)  Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard...........        570
Appendix  (b):  The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard....................................         572
Appendix  (c):  Definitions..............................................................................        580























557








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE  ALL-MERCIFUL,  THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings  and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard  aims to elaborate  the rules for  the shares  of corporations just as it  seeks to explain  the rules for  interest-bearing bonds.








































559





Sharr'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)





Statement of the Standard


1.  Scope of the Standard

This Standard  covers shares with respect to their issuance and flotation including  investment, trading,  renting, loaning,  pledging  and  Salam  in them, along with the rule for concluding  futures, options  and swapping contracts  on the basis of shares.

The  Standard  also  covers  issuance  of and  trading   in  interest-bearing bonds.  The Standard  does not cover investment  Sukuk  for which there is a separate specific standard.
2.  Rules for  Issuance  of Shares

2/1  The  issuance  of shares   is  permissible if the objectives for which the corporation was established   are permissible according to  the Sharf'ah, thus,  the objectives of its  formation  should  not be transactions  that are prohibited,  like the manufacturing  of liquor,  trading  in swine  or transactions in Riba. Ifthe objectives of the corporation are impermissible, the formation af the corporation is  permissible too,  and consequentially so is the issuance of shares that constitute  such a corporation.

2/2  It  is permissible  to add a determined percentage  to the value of  the share  at the time  of subscription  to cover the expenses  of issuance as long as this percentage is fixed and determined to be a reasonable amount.  [see item 4/1/2/2 ofShari'ah Standard  No. (12) on Sharikah (Musharakah)  and Modern  Corporations]
2/3  It  is  permissible   to  issue  new  shares  for  increasing  the  capital  of a corporation  if such shares are issued at a price that  is  equivalent to the value of the old shares, which  is  worked out through expert valuation  of the assets of the corporation or on the basis of the mar• ket-value whether  this is at a premium  or at a discount  with respect to the price of the issue.  [see  item  4/1/2/3  of Shari'ah  Standard  No. (12)  on Sharikah  (Musharakah)  and Modern  Corporations]



560





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

2/4  It  is permissible  to underwrite the issue when  this is  done  without compensation  in lieu of underwriting. This is an agreement, at the time of the formation of the corporation,  with someone who undertakes  to purchase the entire issue of shares, or a part thereof  It is an undertaking from  the person  bound  to subscribe  at the nominal  value to all that remains and has not been subscribed  to by  another  It  is  permissible to acquire compensation  for work, like the preparation  of  feasibility studies  or  the  marketing  of shares,  irrespective  of the  work being undertaken  by the underwriter or someone  if such compensation  is not in lieu of a guarantee.  [see  item  4/1/2/4 of Shari'ah Standard No (12) on Sharikah  (Musharakah)  and Modern  Corporations]

2/5  It is   permissible  to split  the  value  of the  share into  instalments  at the  time  cf subscription  so that  one instalment  is  paid  and  the re• maining  instalments  are  def zrred.  The subscriber  will be  considered a participant  to the extent of what he has paid up  and will be bound to pay his additional capital in the company, and this  on the condition that the instalments apply to all the shares and that the liability of cor• poration remains restricted to the value of the shares subscribed  to. [see item 4/1/2/5  of Sharf'ah  Standard No.  (12)  on Sharikah  (Musharakah)
and Modern  Corporations I

2/6  It  is   not  permissible   to  issue  preference  shares  that  have  special financial features leading to the granting of priority  to these shares at the time of liquidation  or the distribution of profits. It is permitted to grant  certain  shares features related to procedural or administration matters,  in  addition  to  the rights  attached  to ordinary   shares,  like voting  rights.   [see  item  4/1/2/14  of Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (12)  on
Sharikah  (Musharakah)  and Modern  Corporations]

2/7 It is  not  permissible  to issue  Tamattu' shares.  These  are shares  that grant the participant compensation  in lieu of his shares, whose value is  redeemed  during the existence  of the company,  and he is granted
Tamattw' shares  that  grant  him  rights  that  are available  for  shares
based  cm   capital,   except  the  right  to  profits  and  the  distribution
of assets at  the  time of winding  up, insofar  as the Tamattw' shares



561





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na  (21): Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

are entitled  to  profit  lesser than  that  given to the  owner  of shares based on capital, just as the owner of Tamatt' shares does not have a share in the assets of the company  at the time of winding  up until the  owners  of shares  based  on capital have  been granted  the value of their  shares.  [see  item  4/1/2/15  of Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (12)  on Sharikah  (Musharakah)  and Modern  Corporations]
2/8 The share certificate - or what stands in its place -is  a document  that is deemed evidence of ownership of the shareholder  for his undivided share in the assets of the company.  It is permitted  that this  document be in the name of the owner,  to his order,  or for the bearer.

3. Rules for  Dealing  in Shares

3/1   A share represents an undivided  share in the capital of a corporation, just  as it  represents  an undivided  share in its assets and  the  rights associated with it upon conversion  of the capital into tangible things, benefits,  debts and so on. The subject-matter of the contract  at the time of trading  of shares is this undivided  share.

3/2  It  is  permissible  to  buy  and  sell shares  of corporations,  on  a spot or def zrred  basis in which delay is  permissible,  if the activity of the corporation   is  permissible  irrespective  of its being  an  investment (that  is,  the  share  is   acquired  with  the  aim  of profiting  from  it) or dealing  in it (that  is,  with  the  intention  of benefiting  from  the difference in prices).
3/3  Participation  or trading  in shares for purposes  of conversion

Participation  or trading is permitted for purposes of conversion for one who has the ability to effect conversion by  adopting a resolution for

(1)  See the Shari'ah basis for  the standard,  item  (18),  for the permissibility of trading in shares  of corporations  whose assets represent  tangible  things  and profits  along with debts and cash that are in excess of the tangible assets and profits with the stipulation that such tangible and cash assets should  not be less than one-third. The reason is that the debts and cash can be properly considered as secondary  to them. (This explanatory note  is intended to complete  the text  of the  Standard  for implementing  subsequent amending procedures, God willing).



562





Sharr'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

conversion in accordance  with the Shari'ah at the first general meeting or by  striving  for  conversion  in  line with  item  3/4/6.  [see  Shari'ah Standard Na.  (6) on Conversion of a Conventional Bank into an Islamic Bank]

3/4  Participation   or trading (for  investment  and trading)  in the  shares of corporations  whose primary  activity is  permissible,  but they make deposits or borrow  on the basis of interest

The fundamental  rule is that of prohibition  of acquiring shares of and transactions   (investment  and trading)  in the shares af corporations that sometimes  undertake  transactions  in Riba and other prohibited things  even  when  their  primary   activity  is   permissible,  but  from this  rule subscription   and  transactions   (investment or trading)  are exempted  with the following conditions:

3/4/1  That  the  corporation   does  not  state  in its memorandum  of association  that one ct its objectives is to deal in interest,  or in prohibited  goods or materials like pork (swine) and the like.

3/4/2 That the collective amount  raised as loan  on interest - whether long-term  or short-term   debt  --  does not  exceed  30%  of the market capitalization of the corporation, knowingly that raising loans on interest is  prohibited  whatsoever the amount  is.

3/4/3 That  the  total  amount   of  interest-taking deposits,  whether short-, medium-   or long-term, shall not  exceed  30%  of  the market  capitalization  of  total  equity,  knowingly that  interest• taking deposits are prohibited whatsoever the collective amount is.

3/4/4  That   the   amount    of   income   generated    from   prohibit• ed  component  does  not  exceed  5%  of  the  total  income  of the  corporation  irrespective   of the  income  being  generat• ed  by  undertaking  a  prohibited  activity,   by ownership   of a prohibited asset or in some other way.  If a source of income is  not  properly  disclosed  then  more  effort  is  to be exerted for identification  thereof  giving due care and caution  in this
respect.



563





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

3/4/5  For the determination of these percentages,  recourse  is  to be
had to the last  budget or verified financial  position.

3/4/6 It is obligatory to eliminate prohibited income specific to the share  that is  mixed up with the earnings  of the corporations, and this in accordance with the following:

3/4/6/1 The elimination  of prohibited  income is  obligatory on one who is  the owner of the share,  whether an investor or a trader,  at the end of the financial  period,  even if the payment is  due at the time of issuance  of the final financial  statements  whether  quarterly,  annual  or  for other period.  Accordingly,  elimination is not obligatory for  one  who  sells   the  shares  before  the end  of the fi nancial  period.
3/4/6/2 The subject-matter  of elimination  is  the prohibited  in• come specific to the share  whether  or not the profits have been distributed  and whether Or not the corpora• tion has declared a profit or suffered a loss.

3/4/6/3  Elimination is not obligatory for the intermediary, agent or manager out of part of their  commission or wages, because this is their right in lieu of the work they have undertaken.

3/4/6/4The  figure,  whose  elimination  is  obligatory  on  the person  dealing in shares, is  arrived at by dividing  the total  prohibited  income  of  the  corporation   whose shares  are traded  by the number  of shares of the cor• poration, thus, the figure specific to each share is obtained.  Thereafter   the  result  is  multiplied   by the number  of shares  owned  by the  dealer  - individual, institution,  fund or another  - and the result  is what is to be eliminated  as an obligation.
3/4/6/5 It is not permissible  to utilise  the prohibited  component
in  any way whatsoever  nor  is  any legal  fiction  to be



564





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

created to do so even  if this is  through  the payment of
taxes.

3/4/6/6The  responsibility  for elimination   of the  prohibited component  of the income,  for  the benefit of all, falls upon the institution in case it is  trading  for itself or in case it is  managing the operations.  In the case of inter• mediation, however,  it is  bound  to inform  the person dealing in them of the mechanism  for the elimination of the prohibited  component  so that he can undertake it  himself.  'The institution   may  offer  these  services, with or without  a charge, for those dealers who desire them.

3/4/7 The institution  will apply the above rules whether  it does so directly  or through  another  and whether  it is  trading for itself or for another  by way of intermediation  or management  of wealth,  like funds,  or is  doing so  as the agent of another.

3/4/8  It is  necessary  to observe these  rules throughout   the period of participation  or trading.  If the rules cannot be applied,  it is obligatory to give  up such  investment.

3/5  It is  not permissible  to purchase  shares by raising  interest-bearing loans through  a broker  or another  (margin  sales), just  as it  is  not permitted  to mortgage the shares for such  a loan.  [see item  4/1/2/6 of
Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (12)  on Sharikah  (Musharakah)  and Modern
Corporations]

3/6  It is not permissible to sell  shares that the seller does not own (short sale),  and the promise  of a broker to lend these at the time of delivery is of no consequence.  [see  item 4/1/2/7  of Shari'ah  Standard  No. (12) on Sharikah  (Musharakah)  and Modern  Corporations]

3/7  It is permissible  to the buyer of a share to undertake  transactions  in it by way  ct sale to another  and the like after the completion  of the formalities of the sale and the transfer of liability to him even though the final settlement  in his favour has not been made.



565





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

3/8  Tb secure lawful  interests,  it is permissible  to specialised official agen• cies to organize trading in some shares so that it cannot be undertaken except through  specialised brokers or those licensed to undertake  the activity.  [see  item  4/1/2/8 of Sharf'ah  Standard No.  (12)  on Sharikah (Musharakah)  and Modern Corporations]

3/9  It is not  permissible to lend shares  of corporations.

3/10 It is  permissible  to mortgage  shares that  are lawful according  to the Shari'ah,  and in this respect there is  no difference whether  the assets of the corporation  are cash, tangible assets or debts or they are a com• bination of cash,  tangible assets and debts and irrespective of one type being predominant in them. This is  to be done in conformity with the conditions  for selling shares at the time of liquidation.

3/11 The contract of Salam  is not  permissible in shares.

3/12It  is  not  permissible   to conclude  futures  contracts   for shares.  [see item  5/1  of Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (20)  on the Sale of Commodities in Organized  Markets]

3/13 It  is  not permissible  to conclude  contracts  of options  for  shares.  [see item 5/2  of Shari'ah Standard No.  (20)  on the Sale  of Commodities  in Organized  Markets]

3/14 It is not permitted to conclude  swap contracts with respect  to shares and their  returns.

3/15 It is not permissible  to rent shares, whether  this is  for pledging them or for the purpose  af  selling the rented  shares,  and returning shares similar  to them,  as is  done  in  the  stock-markets,  or for acquiring their  profits or for  showing a stronger  financial  position  of the hirer or for  another  reason.
3/161t  is  permitted to  lend  shares  by way of Tarah  for the  purpose   of pledging  them  or  for  the  purpose   of granting their  profit  to  the borrower as is done  in  stock markets.  The borrower does  not have the right  to sell the shares  except  for the execution  of the  terms  of the mortgage.



566





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

3/ 17 It is not permissible to undertake trading in the shares  of a corpora• tion, when  the assets of the corporation are cash exclusively, whether this  is  during the period  of  subscription or after  that,  prior  to  the commencement of  the  business   of  the  company. or at the  time  of liquidation, except  at their  nominal value and with the condition of delivery  of possession.

3/18  It is not permissible to undertake trading  in the shares of a corporation if the entire  assets of the corporation are composed of debts,  unless the rules for dealing  in debts are observed.

3/19  If the assets af a corporation  are composed  of tangible assets,  benefits, cash and debts, the rule for trading  in the shares of such a corporation will differ according  to the  primary asset,  which  conforms  to the objective  of the corporation and  its usual  activity.  If its purpose and activity pertain  to trading  in tangible assets, benefits and rights, trading in its shares is permissible  without  taking into account  the rules of Sarf or transactions in debts, with the condition that the total market value of assets,  benefits  and rights  should  not be less  than 30% of the total assets value of the corporation including all assets, benefits, rights and cash liquidity  (the  corporation's  debts,  current  accounts  with others, and  bonds  it holds  which  constitute  debts)  irrespective   of their  size as in such a case these are secondary. If,  however, the objective  of the corporation and its usual activity is dealing in gold, silver or currencies (Sirafah),  it is  obligatory  to undertake trading in its shares  in the light
of the rules of Sarf.

3/20 It is stipulated for the implementation of what is laid down in paragraph
3/18  that  it shall  not be adopted  as  a means  for bargains  in debts and trading  in them  by merging  parts  cf. tangible  assets and benefits  with the debts as  a legal device  for transaction in debts.

4. Rules  for  Issuance of Bonds

The issuance of all kinds of bonds  is prohibited when  these bonds  include stipulations for the return  of the amount of loan and  excess in  any form, whether such excess is paid at the time of the satisfaction of the principal amount of loan,  is  paid  in  monthly or yearly.  instalments  or in another



567





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

manner and whether this excess represents a percentage  of the value of the bond,  as in the case with most types of bonds,  or a part of it, as is the case with zero-coupon  bonds. Likewise, prize bonds are also prohibited.  This applies irrespective of the bonds  being private,  public or governmental.

5. The Rule for Trading  in Bonds

Trading  in bonds, both  sale and purchase, is  prohibited  and so is their pledging and endorsement and so on.
6. Shari'ah  Substitute  for Bonds

The  Shari'ah  substitute  for bonds  are  investment  Sukuk.  [ see Shari'ah
Standard  No.  (17)  on Investment  Sukuk]

7. Date of Issuance  of the Standard

This Standard  was  issued  on 30 Rabi' I,  1425  A.H.,  corresponding  to 20
May 2004 A.D.


































568





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)





Adoption of the Standard


The  Shari'ah  standard   on  Financial   Paper  (Shares  and  Bonds)  was adopted  by the Sharf'ah  Board  in its  meeting  No.  (12)  held at Al-Madinah AI-Munawwarah   from  26-30 Rabi' I,  1425  A.H.,  corresponding to  15-20
May 2004 A.D.











































569





Sharr'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. (7) held at Makkah Al-Mukarramah from  9-13  Ramadan   1422  A.H.,  corresponding  to  24-28  November  2001
A.D.,  decided  to issue  the Shari'ah  standard on financial  paper  (Shares  and
Bonds).

On 25 Rajah  1423  A.H.,  corresponding to  2 October   2002 A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Standards  Committee  decided to commission  a Shari'ah  consultant for the preparation ct an exposure draft on the Shari'ah Standard on Financial Paper (Shares  and Bonds).

In meeting  No.  (6) of the Shari'ah  Standards  Committee (2) held  from
14-15  Muharram 1424  A.H.,  corresponding to 17-18  March  2003 A.D.,  in the Kingdom  ct Bahrain,  the  Committee discussed  the Shari'ah  standard and required  the consultant  to incorporate  necessary  amendments in the light of the discussion  and observations of the members.

In meeting  No.  (7) of the Shari'ah  Standards  Committee  ( l)  held from
14-15  Safar  1424  A.H.,  corresponding  to  16-17  April 2003  A.D., in  the Kingdom   of  Bahrain,   the  Committee  discussed   the  exposure   draft  ct the  Shari'ah  Standard  on  Financial  Paper  (Shares and  Bonds)  and  made necessary   amendments,  just   as  the  Committee   discussed   the  exposure
draft  ct the  Standard  in  its meeting held  from  25-26  Rabi'  II, 1424  AH.,
corresponding to 25-26 June 2003 A.D., and made  necessary  amendments in the light of the discussion  and observations of the members.

In its meeting No. (9) held from 23-24 Jumada 1, 1424 AH, corresponding to 23-24 July 2003 A.D., at Amman,  the Hashimite  Kingdom  of Jordan,  the Committee  discussed the exposure draft of' the Standard and made necessary amendments  in the light ct the discussion  and observations of the members.



570





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

The revised exposure  draft of the Shari'.ah standard  was presented to the Shari'ah  Board  in its meeting No.  (11) held  in Makkah  Al-Mukarramah from 2-8 Ramadan  1424 A.H.,  corresponding to 27 October  -2  November
2003 A.D.  The  Shari'ah  Board made  further  amendments to the exposure
draft of the standard, and decided  that it be sent to specialists and interested parties  in order  to obtain their  comments  in preparation for the discussion of the standard  in a public hearing.

A public hearing was held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 29 Dhul-Qadah
1424  A.H.,  corresponding  to  21  January  2004  A.D.  The  public  hearing was attended  by more than SO participants representing central banks, institutions,   accounting  firms,   Shari'ah   scholars,   academics   and  others
interested  in the field.  The members  of the Shari'ah  Standards Committees (1) and (2),  responded  to the written  comments  that were sent prior to the public  hearing  as well  as to the oral comments  that  were expressed  in the public hearing.

The  Shari'ah  Standards  Committees  (1)  and  (2)  in a joint  meeting  in the  Kingdom   of Bahrain  on  30 Dhul-Qaldah   1424  A.H.,  corresponding to 22  January  2004 A.D,  discussed  the comments  that were made  during the  public  hearing  as well as the  observations   received  in  writing.  The Committees made amendments that were deemed  suitable.

The amended  exposure  draft was presented  to the Drafting  Committee in  its  meeting  held  in the  Kingdom  of Bahrain  on  25  Safar  1425  A.H., corresponding to 15  April 2004 A.D.

The  Shari'ah  Board  in  its meeting  No.  (12)  held  at  AI-Madinah   Al• Munawwarah during the period  26-30 Rabi' I, 1425 A.H., corresponding to
15-20  May 2004 A.D.,  discussed  the amendments suggested by the Shari'.ah
Standards Committee and the Drafting  Committee, and incorporated the amendments deemed  suitable.  The Shari'ah Board  unanimously adopted some  of the  items  of the  standard   and  some  items were adopted   by the majority  vote  of the  members   of the  Shari'ah  Board,  as recorded  in  the minutes  of the meetings  of the Shari'ah  Board.






571





Sharf 'ah  Stan dard  No  (21):  Finan cial Paper (Shares  and Bonds)





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Issuance of Shares
• The basis for the  permissibility  of the issuance  of shares,  when the objec• tives for which the corporation  has been established are permissible, is  the basis  for  the permissibility  of the corporation   (Sharikat  al-Musahamah), which is the  generality of the evidences conveying the obligation of abiding by contracts and conditions, the generality of the evidences conveying the permissibility of partnership, and the generality of the evidences conveying the permissibility  of 'Inan,  Mudarabah,  Musaqat and  Muzara'ah.  'Inan  is the basis for the permissibility of  participation by two or more persons with their  wealth and  labour,  just  as Mudarabah,  Musaqat  and  Muzara'ah  are
the basis for the permissibility of participation  with wealth from one side and labour  from the other side whether  the  subject-matter  of the contract is  cash, as in the case of Mudarabah, or is tangible assets that are developed with work on these assets, as in the case of Musaqat and Muzara'ah.  The evidences for all these forms are well known.
• The  basis  for  the permissibility  of underwriting   the  issue  without  com• pensation  is   that   it  is   an  undertaking  that  does   not  have  a  coun• ter-value,   which  is  the  taking  of  compensation  for  it.   In  this  regard a resolution  of the International  Islamic Fiqh Academy has been issued. The basis for  the impermissibility  of the issuance  of pref rence  shares,  that is,  in other than the prescribed  manner,  is  that this leads  to the severance of participation   in  profit  and  the  imposition   of injustice  on  the other shareholders.
■  The  basis  for the  impermissibility  of issuing  Tamattw' shares   is  that  the
owners of these shares claim their rights to profit and their redemption  is

(2)  International Islamic  Fiqh  Academy Resolution No.  63  (1/7)  on Financial Markets. (3)  International Islamic Fiah  Academy Resolution No. 63  (1/7)  on Financial  Markets.



572





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

only in form as they continue  to be owners of these share and are entitled
to rights at the time of liquidation.
The  basis for  the permissibility  of share being in a person's  name, at his order, or for bearer is that the Lawgiver wishes to establish rights through writing  and  other  forms,  but He has not  determined  a particular   form for this.  If in the  case of corporations- this  takes  place through  the  is• suance  of shares  on  which  names  of the shareholders  are  written  then this  is  valid.  Likewise,  if this  is  undertaken  by recording  the  names  of the shareholders  in special registers,  or indexes,  or in any other  way, or even if the names are not recorded  at all -neither on the certificates  nor elsewhere- then this  is permissible.
Trading  in Shares
• The basis for  the permissibility  of the sale and purchase  of shares of cor• porations, when the activity of the corporation  is  permissible, is that the shares are owned  by the shareholder, and  he has the  right to undertake transactions   in  them  as  he desires  whether  this  is  by way of sale,  gift or another  way, especially when  each one of the  shareholders  has been granted  permission  to undertake  such transactions   through  their  parti• cipation in the memorandum of the corporation  and by subscribing to it. The  basis  for  the  permissibility  of participation  by  one  who  has  the ability  to  convert   or  makes   an  effort   to  convert   insofar   as  that   is
a means  to alter the rejected  and belongs to the category  of al-Amr Bil• Mdruf Wa al-Nahy  'An al-Munkar (enjoining good and forbidding  evil),
which  is  an  act  approved  by  acknowledged   evidences.   In  this  regard a jurstic  opinion  (Fatwa)  has been  issued by the Third  Seminar  on  Fi• nancial  Markets.9
The  basis  for  exempting  trading   in  the  shares  of these  corporations, whose primary  activity is permissible, however, they deposit amounts and borrow  on the basis of interest,  is  the application  of the rule  of removal of hardship  and acknowledging  of general need, widespread  practice,  the acknowledged principles of surplus,  shortage and predominance,"as  well

(4) Held  in the Kingdom of Bahrain  during Jumada  I,   1412  A.H.,  corresponding to
November  1991  A.D.
(5)  A1-Furuq" by  AI-Qarafi  [4:  104];  41-Muwafaqat"  [I:  37];  Ahkam AI-Qur 'an" by  Ibn
Al-Arabi  [4:  1804];  and "Qawa'id Al-Ahkam F Masalih Al-Anam" [1:   18, 4145].



573





Sharr'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial  Paper (Shares and Bonds)

as the permissibility  of dealing with one the major part  of whose wealth is   permissible,"along  with  reliance  upon  the  issue  of  separation   of bargains according to some Jurists.   This is  upheld by most fatwa issuing organisations as well as the Shari'ah Supervisory Boards of Islamic banks.@" The basis of the impermissibility of buying shares  by raising interest-bearing loans from  the broker or someone else,  is  the indulgence in interest and securing this  through  mortgage, and these are activities prohibited  by  the Texts  along with a curse for those who charge Riba,  pay it,  write it down and witness it.
The basis for the impermissibility  of the sale of shares that the seller does
not own is  that this leads to the sale of something  that is not within  the liability ct the seller nor  in his ownership,  and this  is  prohibited  accor• ding to the Shari'ah.
■  The  basis  for the  permissibility   of undertaking  transactions  in  shares even though  the final registration  formalities  have not been completed  is the transfer ofi the liability for loss  (Daman) to the buyer.  This is  attained through constructive  possession  that is  granted  through  the transacting in what he has purchased.
• The basis for the impermissibility of lending the shares of corporations is
that the share at the time of repayment-in  consideration  of what it repre• sents-does  not represent  the same thing that it did  at the time of lending due to the constant  change in the assets of the corporation.
The basis  for the permissibility  of mortgaging  the shares  of corporations
is  the  established  principle that  a thing  can  be mortgaged  if its  sale is permissible.  As the sale of shares is  permitted,  mortgaging  them  is also permitted.  The reason  is  that the purpose  of a mortgage  is  the securing of a loan and recovering  it  through  the sale price of the asset mortgaged in case recovery is  not possible from the debtor. This is  what is achieved through  the mortgaging  of shares and is,  therefore, permitted.

(6)  Bada '? AI-Sana r" [4:  104];  41Ashbah  Wa ANaza 'ir by  Ibn  Nujaym (pp.  112-114);
41Byan  Wa Al-Tahsil"  [18:  194-95],  and AL-Manthur F AL-Qawa'id" [2:  335]
(7)  "Fath al-Qadir  [6:  89-90];  "lqd Al-Jawahir AL-Thaminah" [3:  439];  "AI-Sharh AI-Kabir
Mala Al-Dusuqi [3:  15];  AI-Rawdal [3: 420-25];  and "Majmw A1-Fatawa" [29:  48]
(8)  Among  these is Al Rajhi Organization in its  resolution  No. 48,  23/8/1422  A.H.



574





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

The  basis  for the  impermissibility  of Salam  in  shares  is that  the  sub• ject-matter  of Salam  is   a debt  and  not  an  ascertained   thing,  while  in shares of corporations nothing  works except ascertainment. This is  done by  mentioning the  name  of the  corporation   whose  shares  are  desired through   Salam  thereby  rendering   the  shares  an  ascertained   thing  and not a liability for a debt. Shares  cannot,  therefore,  essentially be the sub• ject-matter of the contract  of Salam.  Further,  Salam  in shares implies the sale f ascertained  things that are not owned and this is  not permitted.  In addition  to this,  the constant  availability of specified shares in the market and the ability of the buyer  to  deliver them  at the end  of the period  is something  that cannot  be guaranteed.
■  The  impermissibility  of concluding  futures  contracts  for shares  is that
these  contracts  imply the  stipulation  of delay in the  delivery  of an as• certained   sold commodity,  that  is,  shares,  and  this prohibited   and  not permitted.  Likewise,  the  delay in the  price  and the  priced  commodity, for this is the sale of a debt for a debt, which is prohibited  by agreement. Further, the seller -mostly-  does not own the shares for which the futures contract  has been  concluded  and  is,  therefore,  selling something  that  is
owned  by another.  This  is  something  over which  there  is  no disagree•
ment  among  the  scholars  as  to  its  impermissibility.  It is  also  included primarily  in the  meaning  of the  Shari'ah  Texts established  By  Prophet Muhammad  (peace  be upon  him)  that  convey  the  prohibition   of the sale of something  that one does not possess.  Again,  most of the futures contracts  are completed  through  a cash settlement  between  the parties, and this is  brazen  gambling  if this  is stipulated  within  the contract.  If it is  not stipulated  in  the contract,  it is  still one type of gambling.  Thereaf• ter, the  purpose  of contracts  is  the  delivery  of possession,  while  in fu• tures  contracts  delivery of possession  is  not the primary  purpose  of the
contracting parties.  These  contracts,  thus,  create an obligation  for,  and
engage the liability of, each party  for a debt that  is  of  no benefit,  except by way of  Mukhatarah and  for waiting  for a loss that will inevitably be incurred  by one party.
• The  basis for the  impermissibility of concluding options  contracts for
shares  is the  right  of option-  which  is  the  subject-matter  of options



575





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

contracts transacted in financial  markets- is not  included  in rights  that can be sold.  The reason  is that  this right  is not  established at all for the seller as it is created through the contract and  after its  creation it  is not related  to  wealth  rather  it  is related  to  an  abstract   thing,  that  is,  sale and  purchase.  If established rights  cannot   be sold  when  these  do not relate  to wealth,  like the  right  of pre-emption,  the  right  to custody of children, the right of Qisas, then, rights  -like the right of option- cannot be permitted in the first  instance.  Added  to this is the fact that  dealing in options contracts is based  on Gharar,  and  Gharar  is prohibited, just like dealing  in options contracts is based  upon  gambling and games  of chance,  equally for the buyer  and the seller of a right to an option,  and this occurs  in cases that  terminate in a cash settlement between  the two parties.  The  contract for  an option falls under  the  sale by a person  of something that  he does  not  own  when  he writes  an option  to buy,  for
he does  not  own the shares  or commodities that  he undertakes to sell;
and  the  sale of what one  does  not  own is  prohibited  according  to  the
Shari'ah.
a  The basis for the  impermissibility  of  concluding  swap contracts  for the dividends  of shares is that these contracts include Riba in both its forms  if the contracts involve the same currency, or Riba al-Nasi 'h alone if it invol• ves two different currencies;  the sale of a debt for  a debt as it is a contract in which both counter-values are def 2rred;  Gharar  due to the uncertainty
about  the amount  of the cash at  the time of the contract; gambling, as the purpose  of these contracts is the acquisition  of the difference between the two average returns  on  the shares and it is  not the delivery of possession, which  is  the purpose  of contracts,  thus, one of the parties  gains and the other inevitably loses,  and this is  truly gambling.  Each one of these prohi• bitions  alone  is  sufficient  to  prohibit  this  type  of contracts,  then  what about all of them  collectively?
• The basis for the permissibility  of trading  in shares or corporations, which
include cash assets and debts, without  regard for the rules of Sarf and dea• ling in debts, even when such debts are more than one-half, is that in such circumstances such assets are deemed  secondary, and in secondary  things matters  that  are not  normally  overlooked  otherwise  are overlooked.  If, however,  the  tangible  assets and  benefits  are less  than  a third,  it  is  not



576





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

permitted  to deal in the shares,  except by observing  the rules of Sarf or transactions  in debts,  because  in such  a case the assets and  benefits  are meagre  and here debts and  cash cannot  be deemed  secondary  to them, and they are the primary  objective of the contract,  thus, those conditions are to be stipulated  for them  that would be applied to them  if they were desired separately.
The basis for the permissibility of trading in shares of corporations  whose assets include debts and cash, when the objective and activity of the corpo• ration is  dealing in things and benefits, without  regard for the percentage of debts and cash, is as  follows:
1.  The Hadith  of Ibn Umar (may  Allah be pleased with him)  stating:  ~ ..
When  a person  buys a slave,  who has wealth,  then  the wealth  is for the
seller,  unless  the buyer  stipulates  this  too"The  Hadith  is  explicit on the permissibility of the sale without  regard for the genus of the price. The general meaning of the Arabic term "Mai in the Hadith includes all  his  wealth  whether   this   is   cash,   debts  or  goods  and  whether this  is  less   or more.  It indicates  that  debts  or cash,  less  or more,  in
comparison  with the price of the slave  are not taken  into account  in the  Hukm,  because  they are in this case secondary  and  are not  the primary  purpose  of the contract.
Imam  Malik relates this Hadith  in Al-Muwatta'   and then  says: "The matter  is  settled unanimously in our view that if the buyer stipulates the wealth of the slave then  it belongs to him, whether  this is  cash   or debt  or goods, known  or unknown.  This  applies  even  if the  wealth owned by the slave is  more than that with which he is purchased,  and irrespective  of whether  the price is  cash debts or goods.0o)

2.   The  Hadith  of Ibn  Umar  (may Allah  be  pleased  with  him)  stating:
"When  a person  buys  a palm-grove  after pollination,  then  the fruit  is

(9)  Agreed upon by  both Al-Bukhari  and Muslim.  The text  of  this Hadith  belongs to Al• Bukhari:  Sahth Al-Bukhari",  "Kitab Al-Musaqat", chapter: When the person has a right of way  or  right to water  in an orchard or palm-grove  (No.  2250);  and Sahih  Muslim", Kitab Al-Buyu", chapter: When a person  sells palm-grove  with fruit (No.  1543).
(10)  See  4l-Muwatta".





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

for the seller,  unless the buyer stipulates this too."The Hadith conveys the permissibility of an absolute  stipulation  on the part of the buyer for the fruit  whether  or not  the fruit has begun  to ripen  despite  the prohibition of the sale of fruit before it has begun  to ripen, as is found in the  Hadith  of Jabir  (may Allah  be pleased  with him)saying:  "The Messenger  of Allah (peace  be upon  him)  forbade  the sale of fruit  be•
fore  it  has begun to ripe!As the fruit was secondary  to the prima•
ry subject-matter, which was the palm-grove,  it was overlooked  when
it would not be if it was the only subject-matter of the contract.

3.  Among  the established  principles  of Fiqh  according  to the  scholars is  that  the  secondary  is  subservient.  One  who  examines  the various issues  flowing from this  principle,  and the cases structured   upon  the principle,  will find that these principles as a group convey the meaning that the secondary  thing will take the rule of the primary  and will not be  assigned  a separate  rule;  it  will come to be owned  along with the ownership  of the primary,  and something  that  will not be overlooked separately will be overlooked when the thing is  secondary.
Among  the cases derived from the rules are the following:
a)  The  subservience   of what  has  not  begun  to  ripen  to  what  has begun to ripen even when what is ripening  is very  little.  It is stated in  "Kashshaf AI-Qina"  as follows:  "The  ripening  of some of the fruit of a tree in a garden  is  its ripening,  that  is,  of the tree as well as the ripening  of all that falls in this category in a single garden.
... It becomes valid with  what has begun to ripen as it is subsidiary
to itu
b)  The sale of a house, whose roof is painted with gold, for gold, or is painted  with silver for silver;  the sale of a sword ornamented with gold for gold;  the sale of milk for  milk; or a thing  made  of wool for wool  and so on.

(11)  Agreed  upon  by both  AI-Bukhari   and Muslim.  The text of this Hadith  belongs to Al Bukhari:  "Sahth Al-Bukhari",  "Kitab Al-Musaqat", chapter: When the person  has a right of way or right  to water  in an orchard  or palm-grove  (No.  2250);  and "Sahih Muslim", Kitab Al-Byu", chapter: When a person sells palm-grove  with fruit (No.  1543).
(12)   Agreed upon  by both Al-Bukhari and Muslim.
(13)   "Kashshaf Al-Qina" [3:  287]  see also 41-Maughn  [6:  156].



578





Sharr'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

Issuance  of Bonds
The  basis for  the  impermissibility  of issuing  interest-bearing bonds  is that  they represent,  in their  customary  nature,  a loan  and  the meaning of a loan is  applied to them  in their nature  according  to the Shari'ah.  As each loan that yields a benefit is  Riba, and the issuance  of bonds  is based upon  loans with  interest,  their  issuance  is  prohibited   according  to the Shari'ah.
Dealing  in (Negotiation of)  Bonds
The basis for the impermissibility of dealing in bonds  is  what has been settled  with  respect  to their  issuance  due to their  being based  on Riba. The reason  is  that the word  negotiation  includes  the meaning  of conti• nuity  and  the  transfer  of the  bond  from  one  hand  to  another  bearing interest  benefits.  This  means  that  the  buyer  ct a bond  continues  to  be a creditor of the issuing corporation  and demands  Riba for his debt.  This is  impermissible according  to the Shari'ah,  and all dealing leading to this is  impermissible.
































579





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)





Appendix (C)
Definitions


Share

It is  the share of a shareholder in the assets of the corporation  and is represented  by a certificate that can be negotiated.  The term share is  also applied to the certificate that represents such share.

Preference Shares
These are shares whose bearer is  accorded priority over the holder of the ordinary share in the distribution of dividends and in claiming his share in the assets of the corporation  at the time of liquidation.
Tamattu' Shares

These are shares whose holder is  granted compensation  for his  shares that are offered for redemption during the existence of the corporation, and in exchange for this he is granted Tamattu' shares that grant him the rights that belong to the holder of shares based upon capital, except in dividends and the distribution of assets a the time of its  winding up, insofar as  the owner of the Tamattu' shares is  given a share in the profits less than that given to the shares based upon capital, just as  the owner of the Tamattu' shares does not get a share in the assets of the corporation  at the time of winding  up until   the owners of shares based on capital  are granted  the value of their shares.

Futures  Contract
It is a contract for a specified thing, or one described as def erred liability, for a deferred prince.

Option  Contract
It is a contract for compensation for an abstract right granting the own•
er the right to sell a specified thing, or to buy it for a specified price, during



580





Sharf'ah  Standar d No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

a determined period, or at a fixed date, either directly or through  an organ•
isation  that guarantees  the rights of the two parties.

Swap Contract
It is  an agreement  between two parties to exchange at a subsequent  date the average return  on a specified share, or a group of share  fa- the average return  on a share or for another  financial asset.

Bond

It is  a financial paper issued  by trading  establishments  and governments in order to raise long-term  loans  (wealth)  in lieu of interest that is paid to the bearer of the bond  after periods.  They are sometimes  issued at a discount with respect to their face value.






































581


























