Shari'ah Standard No.  (20)



Sale of Commodities in
Organized Markets












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        540
I.  Scope of the Standard ............so.sos.sos.sos.sso.sos.so.sos.sos.so........      540
2.  Definition of International Sales and lheir Kinds...............................        540
3.  Shari'ah  Basis for International Commodity Sales..............................        541

4.  Key Applications cf International Commodity Sales                 ,......       543
5.  Derivatives.................................................................................................        546
6.  Date of Issuance of the Standard.............................................................        548
Adoption  of the Standard......................................................................        549
Appendices
Appendix  (a):   Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard..............        550
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard.....................................        552


























537








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all his companions





Preface


This  Standard  aims to elaborate  the foundations  on which international commodity  sales,  between parties from different countries, are based whether the  contracts  have been  concluded   for  spot  or  deferred  commodities  or through  derivatives (futures, options, indexes and swaps). The Standard also explains what is permissible out of these according to the Shari'ah and what is not, along with an explanation of the Shari'ah substitutes for them within the Islamic financial  institutions  (Institution/Institutions)."


























(1) The  word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including  Islamic Banks.



539





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (20):  Sale  of Commodities  in Organized  Markets





Statement of the Standard


1.  Scope of the Standard

This Standard  covers  international  sales contracts  whose subject-matter are  commodities   and  to derivatives  of various  kinds:  Swaps,  Indexes, Futures and Options.

The Standard  does not cover financial and commercial  paper or currencies, because these have their own specific  standards, just  as it does not cover sales that are concluded outside the organized markets.
2. Definition  of International  Sales and Their Kinds

2/1  Definition  of international commodity  sales

2/1/1  International  commodity  sales are contracts  that are concluded in organized  commodity  markets  under  the  supervision  of specialised Organizations and through  intermediaries who coordinate  the  demand   for  sales  and  the  demand   for  pur• chases by employing  standard  contracts  that  contain  various conditions   and  specifications  along  with  a statement   of the period  and  place of delivery:.  The contract may also stipulate the  deposit  of a portion  of the  price as a security for the  ex• ecution  of the  contract and  opening  of an account  with  the intermediary.
2/2 Types of international  commodity  sales

International  commodity  sales are divided into  three types:

2/2/1   Spot  contracts

These are contracts  that require immediate  delivery and accep•
tance  of delivery,  however,  delivery, and  possession  may take place within the limit  of a day or two  days in  accordance with the regulations of the market.



540





Sharf'ah Standard  No  (20):  Sale of Commodities  in Organized Markets

2/2/2   Forward  contracts

These are contracts in which both counter-values are deferred with  the legal effects of the contracts taking  place at a deter• mined  future  date,  and  delivery  and possession take place at that time.

2/2/3   Futures  commodity contracts

These are contracts whose legal effects take place at a determined future  date  either  through  liquidation  between  the  parties,  or cash settlement  or through   counter-contracts,  but  they  rarely end in actual delivery and possession.

2/3  Termination of international  commodity  sales

International  commodity sales end in one of the following ways:

2/3/1   Contracts in which actual delivery takes place for both counter•
values or in one of them;

2/3/2   Contracts that end through  the operation of liquidation between the two parties;

2/3/3   Contracts  that end in cash settlement by agreement;  and

2/3/4  Contracts  that end in counter-contracts.

3. Shari'ah  Basis for International  Commodity Sales

3/1   Spot contracts

Conclusion of spot contracts in the commodity markets  is permitted with the following conditions:
3/1/1   That  the commodity sold  must  be in existence  and owned  by
the seller;

3/1/2   That the commodity sold must be ascertained in a manner  that distinguishes  it from  others;

The documents that establish  the existence  of the commodity, its  ownership  and distinguish  it from others are sufficient proof of the realisation of the two previous  conditions.



541





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (20):  Sale of Commodities  in Organized Markets

3/1/3   That the contract should not include a condition  that prevents the  buyer  from  taking  delivery  of the  commodity   sold  and obliges him to accept a set-off for value;

3/1/4   That  the price be paid on a spot basis.  Delay,  without the stip• ulation of delay, in the delivery of an existing and ascertained commodity, or delay in the acceptance of spot price, does not affect the validity of the contract.

3/2  Forward contracts (both  counter-values delayed)

3/2/1   These are the selling and buying ct commodities  with the stip• ulation of delivery in the near future.  They differ from futures transactions  insofar as  they are  not organized  in an exchange and  they  are  instruments   of hedging  that  do  not  submit  to fi nancial  supervision.

3/2/2  There  are two  forms  for contracts with both  counter-values delayed:

3/2/2/1 That the commodity  is a liability through description, while the price is  def erred,  irrespective of the contract being concluded  with the word  sale  or with the word Salam. These contracts are not permitted, because they amount  to  a Salam  contract  in  which  the  capital  ct Salam  (Ras al-Mal) is not paid promptly.  [see Shari'ah Standard  No.  (10)  on Salam  and Parallel  Salam]

3/2/2/2 That the commodity  is  ascertained, but a delay. in its delivery. is  stipulated  along with a delay. in the price. Such  contracts  are not permitted.

3/2/3   When  the contract  is  that  of Istisna'a,  such  a contract  is  valid even when the price is delayed.   [see  Shari'ah  Standard  Na (11) on Istisna'a  and Parallel  Istisna'a,  item  3/1/5]

3/2/4  There  is  no restriction  in delaying one of the  counter-values: the  price,  while observing  Accounting  Standard  No.  (20)  on Deferred Sale; and the commodity sold, while observing Shari'ah
Standard  No.  (I0) on Salam  and Parallel  Salam.



542





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (20):  Sale  of Commodities  in Organized  Markets

3/3  Futures  transactions in commodities

It is not permitted  to undertake  futures transactions  according  to the Sharf'ah, either  through their formation  or by trading in them.  [see items  2/2/3,  5/1]

4. Key Applications of International Commodity Sales

4/1  Permissible  applications of international commodity sales:

4/1/1   Appointing another  person  as an agent  for  the  purchase of a commodity  at a spot price,  and the sale of the commodity  by the agent to a third person  for a def zrred  price on behalf of the principal  along with  the  determination  of compensation   for the agent as part  amount or percentage  of the purchase  price of the commodity.  These are the operations  of the "Investment Agency"

4/1/2  Appointing   another  person  for the  management   af purchase operations  with a spot price  and sale on a deferred  basis with the  manager  being  entitled  lo  a known  undivided   share  in the profit. These are "Mudarabah" operations. [see Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (13)  on Mudarabah]

4/1/3   The agent  undertaking -after the purchase  of the commodity on  account  of the  principal-   to buy  it for  himself  from  the principal  with  the  stipulation   of distinguishing   between  the liability of the  agent and the  liability of the  principal  for the commodity  and this by  ensuring  two independent offers and acceptances between the principal  and the agent. It is  possible that this be accomplished  through  the exchange of two advices, one  for  notifying   ownership   by  means  of agency  and  the proposal  of purchase  (offer),  and the other  for  agreement  to sell (acceptance).  [see Sharf'ah  Standard No.  (8) on Murabahah (appendices  A and B)]

4/1/4   Purchase by the institution of a commodity on a spot basis and the subsequent  sale of this  commodity  by the institution  to another on a deferred payment basis.  In this application the avoidance of



543





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (20):  Sale of Commodities  in Organized  Markets

buy-back is  stipulated,  like the buyer selling what he purchased with a deferred  price  to one from whom it  was  initially bought on a spot basis at a price lesser  than this (deferred  price).

4/2  International  commodity sales prohibited by the Shari'ah

4/2/1   Transactions  in commodities  that are not permissible.

4/2/2   Sale  of the purchased commodity  prior to its  ascertainment  in a manner  that  distinguishes  the  commodity sold from  other commodities  leading to the overlapping  of the liability of the buyer  and  the  liability  of the  seller due to  the  mixing  up of what is owned by the buyer with what remains with the seller.
4/2/3   Purchase  by  the  agent  of a commodity   for  the  institution's account and its  sale thereafter  to himself without  the exchange of two  advices  of offer  and  acceptance  between  the  agent• buyer and the institution  that owns the commodity so that the liability of the principal  (seller) and  the  liability of the  agent selling the commodity to himself come to overlap.

4/2/4   Sale by the agent of the purchased  commodity before actually or legally taking  delivery. Legal  delivery  includes  the  transfer of liability to the buyer (agent) by ascertaining  the commodity in a manner  that  distinguishes  it  from  things  other  than  the
commodity  sold.

4/2/5  Commodity purchase operations of the  institution   through agency and purchase thereafter by the agent for his own account on a def2rred  basis by confining  the transaction  to an offer by the  agent  to the  institution  to enter  into the  transaction   and
acceptance by the institution  thereof prior to taking possession of the commodity  by the institution  or without the exchange of the two advices of offer and acceptance.

4/2/6   Purchase  of a commodity   by an institution  on the  basis of a spot price  and  thereafter  its  sale to the  (same)  institution  it• self on a  deferred  basis,  or its  sale to a  holding  institution  of the seller institution  with complete  or majority  ownership,  or



544





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (20):  Sale of Commodities  in Organized  Markets

with effective control, amounts  to a buy-back  ('Inah)  sale. [see Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (8)  on  Murabahah   and  item  2/2/4  of Shari'ah  Standard  No. (11) on Istisna'a  and Parallel Istisna'a]
4/2/7  Sale   by an agent  of a commodity  for his  client,  prior  to the transfer  of ownership  to him through  purchase, to an institu• tion that  is  his principal.

4/2/8  Sale  of ascertained   specified commodity, without  its passing into the ownership  of the seller,  through  fictitious  documents or the sale of the same commodity  at the same time  to more than one institution dealing with the commodity.  It is necessary to be precise  about  the numbers  of the title documents of the commodity  along  with  the  fixing  of liability  for the  person causing a discrepancy.

4/2/9   The lack of detail about  compensation  for agency (brokerage) and merging  it  with  the determined  purchase price, which  is stated  as an  amount  that  includes  it.  The  substitute  for this is  the mentioning of the compensation  and then  deducting it from the inclusive price, or the addition  of the compensation to the purchase  price or the determination of the sale price with the specification that what is  in excess is  the compensation  of the agent.

4/2/10 A statement  within  the  general  memorandum of agency. for purchase  and sale of commodities that denies  the right of the buyer (principal)  to take delivery of the commodity.

4/2/1  1    The institution making the payment of the purchase price of the commodity  contingent  upon  the agent providing  a guarantee for the  payment  of the  sale price  by the  agent  himself  or by another  person.

4/2/12  Stipulation of a guarantee  by the seller for the sale price under all circumstances.  He is obliged to provide  a guarantee  in  case of tort,  negligence  or breach  of the provisions  of agency  like the  stipulation  that  he obtain  sureties  from  the buyers  of the



545





Sharf'ah Standard  No  (20):  Sale of Commodities  in Organized Markets

commodities with respect  to the deferred  period.  [see  Shari'ah
Standard  No.  (5)  on Guarantees]

5.Derivatives

Derivatives have a large number of kinds,  the most  important of which are: Futures, Options, Indexes and Swaps. The Shari'ah rule for derivatives is based on the rule for the contracts employed  within  their  framework, as stated  in paragraphs that follow:

5/1   Futures

5/1/1   A contract   that  is  binding  under  law.  It is   concluded   on  the trading   floor  of the  exchange  for  the  sale  and  purchase   of commodities or financial instruments for a period  linked to the near  future.  The transaction is  arranged  with the mentioning of the quantity,  type and category  along with the statement of the  date  and  place of delivery.  As for the  price,  it is  the  sole element  that varies,  and it is ascertained in the trading  hall.

5/1/2   The Shari'ah  rule for futures  contracts

It is  not permitted  according to the Shari'ah to undertake  futures contracts either through  their formation  or trading.  [see para. 4]

5/2  Options

5/2/1   A contract   by means  of which  a right  is  bestowed  -but  not an obligation-   for  the  purchase  or  sale of an  identified  item (like   shares,   commodities,   currencies,   indexes   or debts)   at a etermined  price  and for  a determined period.  There  is   no obligation   in  this  contract   except  on  the  person  selling  this right.

5/2/2  The Sharf'ah  rule for options

Options indicated  above are not permitted  neither  with respect
to their formation nor trading.

5/2/3   Shari'ah  substitutes for options



546





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (20):  Sale of Commodities  in Organized  Markets

5/2/3/1  The conclusion  of a contract  pertaining to ascertained assets is permitted according to the Shari'ah, along with the  payment  of part  of the  price  as 'Arboun  (Earnest Money)  with  the  stipulation   that  the  buyer  has  the right  to revoke the contract within  a specified  period in lieu of the  entitlement  of the seller to the  amount of earnest  money  in case the buyer exercises his right of revocation.  It is  not  permitted to  trade  the  right established  with respect to the earnest  money.

5/2/3/2   The conclusion  of a contract  for commodities in them• selves along with the stipulation of an option  for estab• lishing  the  right  of revocation  for  one  of the parties, or for both, during  a known  period. This option  is  not eligible  for trading.

5/2/3/3    The issuance of a binding promise by the owner af assets to sell them,  or a binding  promise  by  one desiring  to buy them,  without  specifying  a counter-value  for  the
promise. This promise is  not eligible for trading.

5/3 Swaps

5/3/1   Swaps are agreements between  two parties for the temporary exchange  ct determined  financial   assets,  material   assets  or interest rates. In some cases the sale of a commodity or deferred currency takes place without  the transaction resulting  in any exchange of the commodity, while in other cases there may be an option,  in  return  for  a counter-value,  that  gives the owner the right to execute or not to execute the contract.

5/3/2   The Sharf'ah  rule for  swaps

Swaps are not permitted  in the forms in which they are practised

in commodity  exchanges.



547





Sharf'ah Standard  No  (20):  Sale  of Commodities  in Organized Markets

6. Date of Issuance  of the Standard

This Standard  was issued  on 30 Rabi' I,  1425  A.H.,  corresponding to 20
May 2004 A.D.




















































548





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (20):  Sale  of Commodities  in Organized Markets





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Standard on International  Commodity  Sales in Organized Markets  was adopted by the Shari'ah  Board  in its  meeting  No.  (12)  held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah during the period of26-30 Rab  I,  1425
A.H., corresponding  to 15-20 May 2004 A.D.











































549





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (20):  Sale of Commodities  in Organized Markets





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (8) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah  during the period of 28 Safar to 3 Rab;' I,  1423 A.H., corresponding  to 11-16 May 2002
A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Board decided  to  issue  the Standard  on International
Commodity  Sales in Organized Markets.

On 25  Rajab  1423  A.H.,  corresponding  to  2  October  2002  A.D.,  the Shari'ah Standards Committee decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare an exposure draft on international commodity sales in organized markets.

The  Shari'ah   Standards   Committee   (2)   in  its   meeting  held  in  the
Kingdom of Bahrain  on  13  Safar  1424  A.H.,  corresponding  to  15  April
2003  A.D.,  discussed  the juristic  study  and required  the consultant  to incorporate  necessary amendments  in the light of the discussion and the observations of the members.  The Committee also discussed the exposure draft in its meeting held on Monday 23 Rabi' II, 1424 A.H., corresponding to 23  June 2003 A.D, and made necessary amendments  in the light of the discussion and the observations  of the members.

The revised exposure draft of the standard was  presented to the Shari'ah Board in its  11th meeting held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah during the period of 2-8 Ramadan 1424 A.H., corresponding to 27 October - 2 November 2003
A.D.  The Sharfah  Board  made amendments to the exposure draft of  the
standard  and decided that it be sent to specialists and interested  parties in order to obtain their comments in preparation for its discussion in a public hearing.

A public hearing was held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 29 Dhul-Qa'dah
1424 A.H., corresponding  to 21  January 2004 A.D. The public hearing was



550





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (20):  Sale  of Commodities  in Organized  Markets

attended   by more  than  fifteen  participants   representing  central  banks, institutions, accounting firms, Sharf'ah scholars, academics and others interested  in the field.  The members  of the Sharf ah Standards  Committees (1) and (2),  responded  to the written comments  that were sent prior  to the public  hearing  as well as to the oral comments  that were expressed  in the public hearing.

The Shari'ah  Standards  Committees  (1)  and (2)  in a joint  meeting in the
Kingdom  of Bahrain  on 30  Dhul-Qadah  1424  A.H.,  corresponding to 22
January 2004 A.D., discussed the comments that were made during the public hearing as well as the observations received in writing. The Committees made amendments  that were deemed suitable.

The amended  exposure  draft was presented  to the Drafting  Committee in its  meeting  held  in the  Kingdom  of Bahrain  on  25  Safar  1425  A.H., corresponding to  15  April 2004 A.D.

The Shari'ah  Board  in its  meeting No.  (12)  held  in Al-Madinah  Al-Mu•
nawwarah  during  the period  of26-30  Rab?'  I,  1425  A.H.,,  corresponding to
15-20 May 2004 A.D., discussed the amendments suggested by the Sharf'ah Standards Committee  and the Drafting  Committee, and incorporated the amendments deemed  suitable.  The  Shari'ah  Board  unanimously adopted some  of the  items  of the  standard  and  some  items were  adopted  by the majority  vote of the  members  of the Shari'ah  Board,  as recorded  in the minutes  of the meetings  of the Shari'ah  Board.





















551





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (20):  Sale  of Commodities  in Organized  Markets





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


■  The  basis for  the  permissibility  of international  sales transactions  that fulfil the  required  Sharfah  elements  and  conditions  of the  validity  of sales is  their  inclusion  within  the  fold  of the sale  with  respect to which the  Words  of Allah,  the Exalted, were laid  down:  {".Where Allah has permitted trading..'},as well as His Words:  {"..Eat not up your property among yourselves unjustly  except it be a trade amongst you,  by mutual consent.."}. 'The  implementation  of the  international  conventions  on sales or the implementation  of the laws  of some countries  does not re• quire prohibition  of these sales if they do not contain what conflicts with
the rules and principles of the Shari'ah,  and this  is due to the Words of Al•
lah  the Exalted:  {"O you  who believe! fifil (your)  obligations.?'}, with the proviso  "except what legalizes the prohibited and prohibits   what  is le• gal",  due to the words of the Prophet (peace be upon him):  "Muslims shall abide by their conditions, except for a condition that legalises the prohibited or prohibits the lawfl".69
•  The basis  for the prohibition  of delaying of both counter-values is  that in this there is  the creation  ct two liabilities,  along with  what the jurists  have mentioned  with  respect  to the impermissibility of delaying the capital of Salam.  Further, there is  opposition  to the  conditions  required  by the contract. The basis for the conditions of spot contracts  in the commodity

(2)  [A1-Bqarah  (The Cow):  275].
(3)  [Al-Nisa'  (Women):  29].
(4)  [A1-Ma 'idah (The Table):  1].
(5)  This Hadith has been narrated  by  a number of Companions.  It  has been related by Ahmad [: 312]; Ibn Majah with a hasan  chain af transmission  [2:  784], Mustafa A!-Babi Al-Halabi edition,  Cairo {1372  A.H./1952A.D.);  Al-Hakim (Hyderabad,  India edition,
1355 A.H.); A!Bayhaqi  [6:  70,  156],  [10:  133], Hyderabad, India edition, 1355 A.H.); Al• Daraqutni [4:  228],  [3:  77],  Dar A!-Mahasin Lil-Tiba'ah,  Cairo (1372  A.H./1952 A.D.).



552





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (20):  Sale  af Commodities  in Organized  Markets

markets  is that  these are  general conditions  of sale and are permitted according to the Sharf'ah.
The basis for the permissibility of contracts in which one of the counter•
values is  deferred is the validity of Bay Mlaijal and Salam.
The  basis for  the permissibility  of forms of transactions  mentioned  in the Standard related to international  commodity  sales is  that  they are concluded in accordance with the principles of Wakalah (agency), sale with a def rred period, Murabahah sale, and all these are valid contracts
• The basis for  the obligation of issuing an offer by the agent for seeking a sale on his own account and its acceptance by the principal as a seller is  the distinction between the liability of the seller (the principal)  and the liability of the buyer (the agent).
• The basis  for  the obligation of specifying  the wages of the agent, and not merging it with the price is  the Hadith: "He who  hires a hired worker must make known  to him his wages"!This rule of the contract of ljarah is applicable to agency for wages.
• The basis for  the prohibition  of stipulating the lack  of delivery in com•
modity sales is that this negates the requirements  of sale, which  are the transf zr of ownership to the buyer and his right to undertake transactions in the sold commodity.
The basis for prohibiting the stipulation of a guarantee by the agent is that the agent is  a trustee and does not provide a guarantee except for cases of transgression, negligence or going against the constraints of agency.
The bases for  the prohibition  of def rred  transactions in currencies are the Hadiths  prescribing the obligation of possession  in their sale.  'This has received support from a resolution of the International  Islamic Fiah Academy emphasising this•
The basis  for the prohibition  of derivatives  is  that  these are  binding promises  that are converted  to sale contracts  pertaining  to the future without an offer and acceptance. The Shari'ah substitutes mentioned  in the Standard for derivatives are stated in a resolution of the International
Islamic Fiqh Academy."

(6)  Related    by  Ibn  Majah  in his "Sunan"  [2:  817];  See also Majma' Al-Zawa 'id  by  Al• Haythami [4:  98],  Dar Al-Rayyan  Lil-Turath  and Dar  A!Kitab Al'Arabi.
(7) The  International  Islamic  Fiqh  Academy Resolution  No.  (63)  1/7.
(8) The  International  Islamic  Fiqh  Academy Resolution  No.  (63)  1/7.



553





Sharf'ah  Standard  No,  (20):  Sale of Commodities  in Organized Markets

The  basis for  the  impermissibility  of options  is  that  the  subject-matter Of the contract  in them  is  not  wealth that  can be deemed  compensation according  to the Sharr'ah."
'The  basis for  the  impermissibility  of swaps  is  that  no  actual exchange  of
counter-values  takes place thereby.  Such  swaps, as well,  usually constitutes interest payment,  'Inah,  and deferment of one of the counter-values.











































(9) The  International Islamic Fiqh Academy Resolution No.  (63)  1/7.



554





















Shari'ah  