Shari'ah Standard No. (22)



Concession Contracts












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        588
I.  Scope of the Standard ..........sos.sos.so.so.so.ososoooooooooo.sos......      588
2.  Definition of Concession.........................................................................        588
3.  Permissibility of Concession Contracts  .............sos.a..a.a.....................      588
4  Offering the Concession  Right ...........as.so.sos.sass..ass.so.ass.as.....      588
5.  Concession  Contracts  for Utilization  of Minerals,  Water  and the
like  (Utilization Concession).................................................................        589
6.  Concession  Contracts  for  Construction  of Projects  (Construction
Concession)...............................................................................................        592

7.  Application  of Utilization Concession Contracts by Institutions......        594
8.  Application  of Construction Concession Contracts by Institutions.        595
9.  Disposing of the Concession License.....................................................        596
IO.  Management Concession  Contracts.......................................................        596
11.  Date of Issuance cf the Standard.............................................................        597
Adoption  of the Standard......................................................................        598
Appendices
Appendix  (a):   Brief History cf the Preparation of the Standard..............        599
Appendix  (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard ..................co.....       60l
















585








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL,  THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all  the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all his  companions





Preface


The purpose of this Standard is to indicate the rules that govern Concession Contracts for utilization of minerals, water and the likes (Utilization Concession),  or construction  of projects   (Construction  Concession),  or management  cf government  facilities  and projects that provide services to the public  (Management Concession).  The Standard  also  highlights  the Shari'ah adaptation of such contracts, as well  as their underlying procedures, rights and duties.  Moreover,  it  portrays  application  of Concession  Contracts  by Islamic fi nancial Institutions  (the  Institution Institutions).

























(1) The  word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer,  in short,  to  Islamic  financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



587





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (22):  Concession  Contracts





Statement of the Standard


1.  Scope of the Standard

This  Standard  covers the  basic Shari'ah  rulings  relating  to Concession Contracts  for utilization,  construction or management   of projects,  and provides guidance to Institutions  on application of such contracts.  It does not  cover legal  or  consensual  concession  rights,  which  are subsidiary rights.  This  standard  does not cover franchises  as it should  be dealt with by a separate  standard.

2. Definition of Concession

Concession in this context refers to the act of an authorized party granting another  party  the right of utilizing,  constructing or managing  a project for agreed upon consideration.

3. Permissibility of Concession Contracts

3/1  The concession contracts  described  in this Standard  are permissible, as set out in the  Shari'ah  rulings,  unless  those  contracts comprise an element that does not conform to the rules and principles of Islamic Shari'ah.  Such  contracts  are considered  to be among the devices that facilitate realization of public interest or the interests pursued  by the two contracting  parties.

3/2  There  is  no Shari'ah objection  to taking on the procedures  required to the offering of concession  rights against specific fes  or any compensation  stipulated  in the contract,  unless the deal constitutes an  element  of  Riha  (usury),  Gbarar   (uncertainty),  or  any  other Shari'ah-banned  practices.
4. Offering the Concession Right

When  offering  concession  rights, due consideration   should  be given  to
justice,  equality of chances,  and realization  of public interest.



588





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (22):  Concession  Contracts

5. Concession Contracts for  Utilization of Minerals,  Water  and  the Like
(Utilization  Concession):

5/1  Definition  of  utilization concession contracts

A Utilization  Concession  contract  is an agreement  between the State and a natural or legal  person (Institution)  according to which the latter becomes the sole owner of the right of extracting  and producing  the minerals,  water  or any other  object  in  question  against  a  specific
remuneration,  as  is shown  in item  5/3 below.

5/2  Formal  procedures of utilization concession

5/2/1  Granting  a survey  license

The  State  has the right  to require  natural  or  legal  persons  to obtain permission  (license) before conducting survey in a certain area  against payment of a specific amount of fee or rent to the State. Such  a license does not grant its holder the right of the sole surveyor in that area nor does it grant him the right to conduct works relating to extraction through  mining and construction  of the required facilities.

5/2/2  Granting  exploration  licenses

The  State has the  right  to require  natural  or legal persons  to obtain  permission   (license) before conducting exploration  in a certain  area for a certain  period against payment  of a specific amount  of fee  or  rent  to  the  State.  Such  exploration   license may entitle its  holder  the right to become  the sole explorer  in that  area  and  the right of conducting  the  works  required  for exploration.

5/2/3  Obtaining  utilization  concession

The exploration  licensee,  after discovering  the minerals, water or any object in question, becomes eligible for the exclusive right of obtaining  the utilization  concession  in the area specified in the license,  unless  the license stipulates otherwise.



589





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (22):  Concession  Contracts

5/2/4 If until  the  end  of the exploration  period,  the  holder  of the exploration   license   (the   licensee)   does   not   discover   the minerals,  water or for whatever the license has been obtained then the licensee is  not entitled to utilization concession  at the end of that period.

5/2/5 Notwithstanding the procedural order stated in preceding para• graphs, the State  may offer  exploration  or utilization  conces• sions directly, and without  resorting  to the above-mentioned procedures.

5/2/6 When the State requests a specialized body to conduct survey or exploration  on its  behalf, the contractual  relationship becomes subject to the rulings of"Ijarah" and "Ju'alah"In this case Shari'ah
Standard No. (9)  on ljarah  and ljarah  Muntahia Bittamleek,  as well  as Shari'ah Standard  No.  (15) on Ju'alah,  should be referred to.

5/3 Shari'ah  perspective on utilization  concession  contracts

Utilization of minerals, water resources and the likes cannot take place without  exploration,  which  entails an  unknown   amount  of effort. Whereas  the  remuneration  to  which  the  holder  of concession  is entitled,  is  usually a well-defi ned lump  sum amount  or percentage share of the output.  The Shari'ah  classifies such  contracts  as  a form
of Ju'alah,  where the State  is  the "Ja'il" (Jalah  initiator), the licensee
Institution  is  the "Amil  (hired  party)  and the  specific  amount  to be received   by the  latter  is  the  "Jl"  (compensation  amount).   [see Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (15)  on Ju'alah]

5/4  Scope of utilization concession  contracts

Since  utilization  concession  contracts  are  concluded  between  the State on the one hand and natural or legal persons on the other, the following should be observed:

5/4/1  When  adopting  the  Fiqh  viewpoint  that  considers  minerals to  be  the  property   ct the  State,  whether  such  mineral  have been extracted from a State-owned  or a privately-owned land,



590





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (22):  Concession  Contracts

concession  contracts   may  be  applied  to all types  of lands, whether  State-  or privately-owned.

5/4/2 When   adopting   the  Fiqh  viewpoint   that  gives the  right  of utilization  of minerals  to the owner of the land or its usufruct against a fee payable to the State, the following types of lands should not become subject to concession  contracts:

5/4/2/1  Privately -owned  lands whether  vacant or built on.

5/4/2/2 Wastelands that have been contracted  for development according to the relevant Shari'ah stipulations and legal rulings.

5/4/2/3 Lands allotted by the State to natural  or legal persons, whether  through  change of ownership  title or fa tem• porary  utilization.

5/5  Requirements  of obtaining the utilization concession

A holder  of a utilization  concession  is  entitled  to undertake  all the activities required  for utilization, such as establishing refineries and treatment  laboratories, acquiring transportation  devices and facilities, etc.  The holder becomes the sole owner of such rights throughout  the period of the concession license thereof
5/6  Continuity of utilization

Concession contracts usually indicate the commitment  of the licensee to continue  utilization  as per contract  or the prevailing  customary practices.  In case the licensee ceases utilization without  a reasonable excuse, the licensee may be given a reasonable grace period to restart again  and  preserve  utilization,  otherwise  the  State  has the  right  to cancel the license thereof.

5/7  Product pricing  and  purchase by the State

5/7/ 1  The  State  has the  right  to  determine  in advance  the way in which the licensee should dispose of his share of the extracted products  and the value to be paid to him taking  into account public  interest



591





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (22):  Concession  Contracts

5/7/2  In addition  to its  own share in the product,  the State  has also the preemptory right of purchasing the quantities it needs from the output, according to the prevailing prices and contractual terms.

5/8 Expiry  of utilization concession  contracts

A utilization  concession  contract  expires at the end of its  specified period, or when the two parties  agree to prematurely cancel  it.  The contract can also be cancelled when there remains no more output to be utilized. Moreover, each of the two parties has the right to revoke the contract when the other party breaches a contractual condition or commitment.  In this case the breaching party has to compensate the other party fer any consequent actual  damages.

6. Concession  Contracts for Construction of Projects  (Construction  Con•
cession)

6/1   Defi nition  and forms  of a construction concession  contract

6/1/1  Definition  of a construction  concession  contract

A Construction  concession contract  is a contract  between the State and another party according to which the latter constructs a specifically defined project usually related to public utilities.

6/1/2  Forms of construction  concession contracts:

Construction  concession contracts may take several forms including the following:
6/1/2/1  When  the licensee  constructs the project according to certain  specifications, on a piece of land owned by the State, and the  State  becomes the owner of the project, while the licensee is entitled to the usufruct of the project for a specific period. After this period,  the ownership  of the usufruct is transferred  to the State.

6/1/2/2 When  the  licensee  constructs   the  project  according to certain  specifications  on a piece  of land  owned  by the  State,   and  the  project  and its  usufructs  become



592





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (22):  Concession  Contracts

the property  of the licensee for  a specific period  after which  the  ownership  of the project  (and  its  usufruct) goes to the State.

6/1/2/3 When  the licensee constructs  the project according to certain  specifications  on  a piece  of land owned by the State,  and the project becomes a property  of the State, while the  two parties  agree to  share  the  revenue  for a specific period  after which the project belongs to the licensee.
6/1/3  In all three cases set out in 6/1/2,  the licensee becomes entitled
to collection of  fees or rent for provision of services to the public.

6/2  Shari'ah perspective  on construction concession  contracts: Construction  concession  contracts vary with regard to their Shari'ah
adaptation,  according to the following conditions:

6/2/1  Ifthe commitment  of the licensee  includes construction  works as well  as provision  of materials,  which  is  the  predominant case,  the contract  is  that of"Istisnaa.  The value  of the contract is  the right which enables the licensee to utilize the project for one's own benefit for  a specific period  before handing  it  over to the State.

6/2/2  If the project is constructed on a piece of land  that the licensee obtained  on  lease  from  the  State  against  handing   over  the project  thereto  after a specific  period,  the  contract  is  that  of "Ijarah"  and the rent is  the project itself which will be handed over to the State  at the end of the contractual  period.

6/3  Remuneration  for construction  concession  contracts

6/3/1 When  the  remuneration  for  construction  of the  project  is determined  in  terms  ct the  right  to  utilize  the  project  for a specific period, the contract is  considered as Istisna'a" against a price determinable in terms ct utilizing the constructed facility for  a specific period before  handing it over to "al-Mustasni"?



593





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (22):  Concession  Contracts

6/3/2 If the remuneration for the construction of a project is  deter• mined  in terms  of a certain  amount   of money, the  licensee retains the ownership of the project  to ascertain  one's right to get the price  through   utilization  of the  project.  Licensee  has also the right  of arranging a clearance  deal with  the licensor so that  the  licensee  can receive  the  full price  and  hand  over the project  to the licensor  before the end of the contract peri• od.  Otherwise, the licensee keeps on utilizing  the project  until the receipt  of the full amount  agreed  upon.

7.  Application of Utilization Concession Contracts by Institutions

Institutions  can  apply.  utilization   concession   contracts  either  through direct relationship with  the  State,  or  by playing  an  intermediary role in the contract between  the State and  the licensee. Application of such contracts may take place in one of the following forms:
7/1  Ju'alah

It is  possible to apply Ju'alah  or Parallel  Ju'alah  where the licensee re•
ceives a specific share of the output  as remuneration.

7/2  ljarah

ljarah  contract  may  be  applied  where  the  State  gives the  land  on lease to the licensee  for a rent  payable  as a predetermined share  of the output.  The licensee may, in turn,  give the land  on lease  to a third party to establish the project thereon  (sub-contracting).

7/3  Mudarabah

Mudarabah may be applied  where the State provides  the land to the licensee  to utilize  it on the  basis of a predetermined rate of profit sharing.  The  Institutions  may either  implement  the project  directly or through  two-steps  Mudarabah.
7/4  Musharakah

In utilization concession  contracts, Musharakah - whether fixed or diminishing - may be applied  as follows:

7/4/1  In fixed Musharakah, the Institution contributes a share  in the required  capital besides the State or the party that executes the



594





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (22):  Concession  Contracts

concession  license,  and the  Musharakah  continues up to the end of the contract's period.

7/4/2  In diminishing Musharakah, the Institution  contributes a share in the  required  capital,  and  undertakes   (the Institution or the party that executes the concession license)  to sell its share in the project gradually to the State.

8. Application  of Construction Concession Contracts by Institutions

Institutions  may apply construction concession contracts whether  through direct relationship  with the State,  or by entering  as an intermediary party in the contract  between  the State  and the licensee.  Application  of such contracts  may take place  in one ct the following forms:
8/1  Ijarah  and Ijarah  Muntahia Bittamleek

In this case,  the licensee  hires the land  from  the  State  with the  aim of constructing the project  thereon  and presenting the project  back to the State based on Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek.  'The licensee may;, use a sub-contract of operating or diminishing Ijarah, to rent out the land to another  party  to construct the project  thereon.
8/2  Istisna'a

Istisna'a  and Parallel  Istisna'a  contracts  may  be  applied  where  the State  is  "al-Mustasni"  and  the  Institution   becomes  "al-Sant  (the licensee  is  a parallel  Mustasni')" and the price  of the product is  the income  generated  from the fe or rent collected  from the public  for provision  of the services.

8/3 Musharakah

In construction  concession  contracts Musharakah, whether  fixed or diminishing,  may be applied  as follows:
8/3/1  In fixed Musharakah, the Institution contributes a share in the required  capital besides the State or the party that executes the concession  license,  and the Musharakah  continues   up to the
end of the contract's  period.



595





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (22):  Concession  Contracts

8/3/2  In diminishing Musharakah,  the Institution  contributes a share in the required  capital,  and undertakes  (the Institution  or the party  that  executes the concession  license)  to sell its  share in the project gradually to the State.

9.  Disposing of the Concession  License

Since  the concession  license is a financial  right,  its  owner  may dispose it of through  selling, leasing, mortgaging,  partnership or securitization according to Shari'ah rulings,  as well as the conditions  imposed  by the licensor.

10.  Management Concession  Contracts

10/1  Definition of management concession  contracts

These are contracts  between the State  and other parties according to which  the right of managing public utilities  and providing services to the public is  given against a specific price.

10/2  Shari'ah  perspective on management concession  contracts

10/2/IWhen the price for offering management  concession  is  de• termined as a lump  sum amount of money or a percentage of total  income,  the contract  between the State  and the licensee is that  of ljarah.  The  licensor  in this  case has the right  to receive  rent for offering the concession  license, in addition to the amount/percentage  of income the licensor deserves during the period of the contract. If the price of the manage• ment concession is a percentage of the profit (net income   af• ter expenses and allocations), the contract between the State
and the licensee becomes Mudarabah  wherein  the capital  is
the original  facility or the project itself.

10/2/2In both cases mentioned  in item  (10/2/1) above, the contract between the State and  the project's utilizer is  either that  of ljarah or Bay' (sale)  contract,  as per the nature of the activity
in question.



596





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (22):  Concession  Contracts

10/3  Cancellation of the management  concession contract

Management concession  contract is  a fixed-term contract. It may be rescinded  by the State  when the licensee breaches  a condition or  fails to  meet  one's  contractual  obligations,  The  licensee  may also rescind  the contract  on condition that  the  licensee takes the measures  that ascertain  the provision  of the services to the public.

10/4Pricing of services

It is  permissible  for the  licensor  to  fix or  adjust  the price  of the services to be delivered by the licensee in a way that leads to establi• shing justice and preservation  of the interests  of both  the licensee and the beneficiaries.

10/5  Observation  of the contract's conditions

The licensor  has the right to perform  (directly or through  depu• tation) monitoring and inspection  to ascertain observation cl the conditions and specifications  stipulated  in the contract.  It has also the right to impose  penalties  stipulated  in the contract, in case of breach of contractual obligations  on the part of the licensee.

11. Date  of  Issuance  of  the Standard

This  Standard was issued  on 22  Rab~'  I,  1426  A.H.,  corresponding to 2
May 2005 A.D.























597





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (22):  Concession  Contracts





Adoption of the Standard


The Sharl'ah  Board has adopted  the Standard on Concession  Contracts  in its meeting No. (14) held in Dubai on 21-22 Rabi' I,  1426 A.H., corresponding to 30 April -2  May 2005 A.D.












































598





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (22):  Concession  Contracts





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


The Sharf'ah Board decided in its meeting No. (7) held on 9-13 Ramadan
1422  A.H.,  corresponding  to 24-28  November  2001  A.D.,  in Makkah Al
-Mukarramah to issue a Shari'ah  Standard on Concession  Contracts.

On  12  Jumada  I  1423  A.H.,  corresponding to  22 July  2002 A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Standards Committee  decided to commission  a Shari'ah consultant to prepare  a draft standard  on concession  contracts.

In  its  meeting   No.   (5)   the  Shari'ah   Standards   Committee  (2)   held on  I  Rajab  1423  A.H.,  corresponding to  8 September  2002 A.D.,  in the Kingdom   of Bahrain,  the  committee   discussed   the  Shari'ah  study  and advised  the  consultant to introduce the  necessary  amendments,  in light of the discussions  and observations of its members.

In the joint  meeting  of  the Shari'ah  Standards  Committees  (1)  and  (2) on 21  January 2004 A.D., held for discussing  the observations  made in the public hearing  that had been convened  on the same day in the Kingdom of Bahrain,  the  committee   discussed  the  draft  standard   on  concession contracts  and introduced necessary changes. The committee also requested the  consultant   to  review  the  document   in  light  cf  the  discussion   and comments  cf its  members.

The committee  once again discussed the draft standard in its meeting in Dubai on 28 Rabi' I,   1425 A.H.,  corresponding to  16 June 2004 A.D.,  and made further  changes therein.

The  revised  draft  of  the  standard  was then  submitted  to  the  Shari'ah
Board  in its  meeting  No.  (3)  held  in Makkah Al-Mukarramah  on  26-30
Sha'ban  1425  A.H.,,  corresponding to 10-14  October  2004 A.D.  The Board



599
