Shari'ah Standard No. (26)




Islamic Insurance












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                                        677
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        678

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               678
2.  Definition oflslamic Insurance in Contrastwith Conventional Insurance.       678
3. Status  of Islamic Insurance  According to Fiqh (Islamic Jurispru- dence)........................................................................................................       678
4.  Contractual Relationships in Islamic Insurance...................................       679
5. Principles and Shari'ah Bases oflslamic Insurance..............................       680
6. Types of Islamic Insurance......................................................................       681
7. Participation in Islamic Insurance                                                            682
8. Commitments  of the Participant in Islamic Insurance                             682
9. Conditions in Islamic Insurance Policies..............................................        683
10. Commitments and Jurisdictions ofthe Joint Stock Company                  683

11. Indemnity...................................................................................................        685
12. Insurance Surplus......................................................................................       685
13. Expiry of Insurance Policy.......................................................................       686
14. Date of Issuance of the Standard.............................................................       686
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        687

Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        688
Appendix  (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard.....................................       690
Appendix  (c):  Definitions..............................................................................       698










675








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


The purpose ofthis standard is to present the Shari'ah rules that govern Islamic Insurance, as well as the characteristics, basic aspects, principles and types of Islamic Insurance. The standard also aims to indicate the controls that Islamic financial Institutions (Institution/Institutions)should observe in this connection.






























(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



677





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers Islamic Insurance in terms ofits definition, Sharf'ah status, characteristics, principles, basic elements, types, and how it differs from Conventional Insurance.  The Standard also sets out the controls to be observed by the Islamic financial Institutions  offering products based on Islamic insurance. However, it does not cover social insurance schemes arranged by the state.

2. Definition oflslamic Insurance in Contrast with Conventional Insur•
ance

Islamic Insurance is a process of agreement among a group ofpersons to handle the injuries resulting from specific risks to which all of them are vulnerable. A process, thus initiated, involves payment of contributions as donations, and leads to the establishment of an insurance fund that enjoys the status of a legal entity and has independent financial liability. The resources of this fund are used to indemnify any participant  who encounters injury, subject to a specific set of rules and a given process of documentation. The fund is managed by either a selected group of policyholders, or a joint  stock company  that  manages the insurance operations and invests the assets ofthe fund, against a specific fee.

As for Conventional Insurance, it is a Mu'awadah (mutual compensation) contract that seeks to make profit out of the insurance operation itself, and, hence, is subject to Shari'ah rulings on financial dealings that involve Gharar (uncertainty).  Consequently, conventional insurance is banned by Sharf'ah.

3. Status oflslamic Insurance According to Fiqh (Islamic Jurisprudence)

Islamic insurance is based on the commitment  of the participants  to make donations  for the sake of their  own interest. The participants,



678





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

therefore, protect their group by payment ofcontributions that constitute the resources of the insurance fund, and assign the management of that fund to a committee of policyholders, or to a joint stock company that possesses the license of practicing insurance business. In the latter case, the company assumes this job on the basis of a remunerated  Wakalah (Agency) contract. In addition to managing the insurance operations, the  committee  of policyholders  or  the  company  also  assumes  the responsibility of investing the assets of the fund through Mudarabah or investment agency.

3/1  The managing company is entitled to its own capital and returns on capital, the agency fee, and its specific share of the profits earned by investing the insurance  assets through  Mudarabah  or investment agency. The company also bears all the expenses of its operations including those relating to its tasks for investing the insurance assets.

3/2 The policyholders fund is entitled to the contributions and the returns thereon, the provisions and reserves relating to insurance business, and the insurance surplus. The fund bears all direct expenses pertaining to management of insurance operations.

4. Contractual Relationships  in Islamic Insurance

There are three contractual relationships in Islamic insurance, including:

4/1  The Musharakah (partnership) among the participants, which leads to the establishment ofa company that has articles ofassociation and all other documents. The relationship between the participants may be confined to a Musharakah contract  if a company manages the fund.  [see Shari'ah  Standard No.  (12), on Sharikah  (Musharakah) and Modern Corporations]

4/2 The relationship between the company and the policyholders' fund which  is a Wakalah  relationship  in regard  to management,  and a Mudarabah  or investment  agency relationship  in regard to the investment of the fund's assets.

4/3 The relationship  between the policy holders and the fund which takes the form of donation  commitment at the stage of making



679





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

contributions, and indemnification commitment at the stage ofpro• viding compensation  for injury as per regulations and underlying constituent documents.

5. Principles and Shari'ah Bases oflslamic Insurance

Islamic insurance  is based  on the  following principles  and rules  of Sharf'ah, which shall be explicitly mentioned in the articles ofassociation or the rules or the documents of the corporation:

5/1  Donation commitment, as it should be stipulated that the participant donates his contribution  and the returns thereon to the insurance account for payment of indemnity, and may undertake to bear any deficit that may occur, as per regulations.

5/2 The company that arranges the insurance deal should maintain two separate accounts: one for its own rights and liabilities, and the other for the rights and liabilities of the policyholders.

5/3 The company should assume the role of the agent in managing the insurance account, and the role ofthe Mudarib or agent in investing the insurance assets.

5/4 The insurance account is entitled to the insurance assets and their returns  on investment,  and should bear the liabilities relating to these assets.

5/5 The adopted rules may comprise disposal of the surplus in a way that serves the cause of common interest ofthe participants, such as accumulation of reserves, reduction of the contribution, charitable donations  and partial/full  distribution  of the surplus among the participants. The managing company is not entitled to any share of the surplus.

5/6 When the company is liquidated,  all provisions and accumulated reserves pertaining to insurance should be spent on charitable pur• poses.

5/7 Preference should be given to policyholders to participate in manage• ment of the insurance operations through appropriate legal arrange• ments that enable them to exercise their control rights and protect



680





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

their interest. Such arrangements  could include, among others, repre•
sentation of policyholders in the Board of Directors.

5/8 Company shall adhere to the rules and principles of Islamic Sharf'ah in  all its activities  and  investments,  especially  in  refraining  from provision  of insurance  coverage for Shari'ah-banned items, activities or purposes.

5/9 A Sharf'ah Supervisory Board  shall be formulated for issuance  of Fatawa  (plural:  Fatwa,  i. e.  juristic opinion)   that  are binding to the  company,  and  establishment of an  internal   unit  for  Shari'ah monitoring and auditing.
6. Types of Islamic Insurance

6/1  Property  Insurance: which  entails indemnification  for actual injury, and comprises insurance against fire, car accidents, airplane accidents, liability, breach of trust, etc. [See Shari'ah Standard No. (5) on Guarantees - item 6/4]

6/2  Person Insurance: which includes insurance against the risk of disability and death, and is sometimes known  as Takaful (mutual support).  It corresponds to conventional life insurance.

6/2/1  Insurance  against the risk of disability or death takes place as follows:

6/2/1/1 Submission  of a request  for participation indicating all personal  affairs  and  characteristics,  that  need  to be known  for offering the insurance coverage to the insured, along with the particulars ofthe entitlements and obligations  of the insured.

6/2/1/2 Specification of the contribution amount.

6/2/1/3 Specification of the benefits payable to the beneficiary as per agreement.
6/2/1/4In case of death,  the  Takaful entitlements  should  be distributed among  the  deserving  persons, parties  or purposes  as indicated  in the documents,  and accord-



681





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

ing to the regulatory rules issued by the Sharf'ah Su• pervisory Board. In case the deceased was entitled to some investment balances, then the same should be distributed among the inheritors according to the Is• lamic rules of inheritance.

6/2/1/5 In case of insurance against death, it should be stip• ulated in the insurance policy that the insured  (the beneficiary)  or his inheritor  should not be entitled to any compensation  when  the  death  is caused by a murder wherein the said beneficiary or inheritor is involved.

7. Participation in Islamic Insurance

7/1  Non-Muslims may participate with Muslims in the various types of
Islamic insurance.

7/2 The  contribution  may be determined  according to the  actuarial principles based on statistical techniques. In this regard, due con• sideration should be given to whether the risk involved is fixed or variable, and to the contribution/risk tradeoffbesides determination of the type and period of the risk coverage, and specification of the insurance amount.

7/3 The risk that constitutes the subject matter of insurance should be one that could probably occur. It should not be something that relates to the absolute will of the participant, and should not encounter any Shari'ah prohibition.

8. Commitments  of the Participant in Islamic Insurance

The participant (insurance seeker) should observe the following commit•
ments:

8/1  Submission ofthe required information about the risks to be insured against, and informing the company of any new circumstances that may increase these risks after concluding the contract. If it is proved that the participant  had committed fraud or deceit,  or submitted false information,  he is then  subject to partial or full deprivation



682





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

from  indemnity. In case of unintentional misrepresentation by the participant, the indemnity shall become proportionate to the accurate information he presented.
8/2  Payment of contribution on time as per agreement. Ifthe participant refrains  from  or delays payment of his contribution,  the  company has the right to terminate the contract  or pursue  legal enforcement of payment.

8/3  Informing the company, in its capacity as an agent of the policyholders' fund,  of occurrence of the risk insured. Notification should be made during the period stipulated in the insurance policy, or within reasonable  time  if such period  is not provided  for in the policy.  If the participant fails to make such notification, the company  has the right to claim indemnity from him for the actual loss incurred by the insurance  account due to such breach of commitment.

9. Conditions in Islamic Insurance Policies

9/1  There is no Shari'ah restriction on providing for special conditions in the insurance policy. Special conditions may relate to periods of insur• ance, denial of indemnity in specific cases as when the participant fails to notify the company about occurrence of risk on time,  or charging the participant  with a specific portion  of the indemnity.  A condition thus stipulated in the insurance policy remains binding  as long as it does not contradict with the rules of Shari'ah or the prerequisites of the contract.

9/2 It is permissible to stipulate in the insurance policy special cases that lead to deprivation from indemnity provided that justice, preservation of rights, and avoidance of abusive conditions are well observed.

10. Commitments and Jurisdictions of the Joint Stock Company

10/1  The  Company  shall  assume  the  various  tasks  of managing  the insurance  operations  including; preparation  of insurance policies, collection of contributions, payment  of indemnities,  and all other technical tasks. The Company performs such tasks against a specific fee, which should be stated in the agreement in order to obtain the participant's  approval thereon by signing the contract.



683





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

10/2 The Company is entrusted  with the duty of achieving common interest  while  undertaking  the  management   of the  insurance operations. However, it should not guarantee the insurance assets except in case of misconduct, negligence or breach of contractual obligations.

10/3  The Company shall bear its pre-operating expenses as well as all other expenses that relate to conducting  its own business or the investment of its own funds.

10/4 The statutory reserve ofthe Joint Stock Company is deducted from its share capital and becomes part of its shareholders equity, a case that  also holds true  for all other capital-related deductions. No deduction shall be made from the policyholders fund or profits for the benefit ofthe shareholders of the Joint Stock Company.

10/5  For the sake ofserving the policyholders' interest, it is permissible to deduct part of their funds or profits to be used as reserves or allocations pertaining  to the insurance  fund. Such deductions, however, should by no means belong to the shareholders  of the Joint Stock Company. The accumulated balance of the insurance account shall be spent on charity purposes in case ofliquidation.

10/6 The Company  claims indemnity from the party who causes the injury, whether  through  breach  of contractual  commitment or any similar misbehavior.  In this case,  the Company  represents the participants  in disposing of all the tasks that relate to the case, such as filing oflawsuits, realization ofthe consequent rights, and depositing the proceeds in the insurance account.

10/7 When  the  Company  invests the  policyholders'  funds  through Mudarabah, it should bear the expenses that are normally borne by the Mudarib  [see Shari'ah Standard No. (13) on Mudarabah]. However, if the Company invests such funds through investment agency, the deal shall be subject to Shari'ah rulings on remunerated agency.



684





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

10/8  When the insurance assets along with indemnities received from re• insurance companies fall short ofcovering indemnity commitments, the Company may cover the deficit from project financing or Qard Hasan (interest-free  or benevolent loan) debited to the  account of the insurance fund. In this regard, the deficits resulting from commitments ofthe current year may be covered from the surpluses of the succeeding years. The Company may also claim settlement of the deficit from policyholders if they undertake to do so in the insurance policy.

10/9 The insurance  account shall bear all the expenses and fees that relate to insurance activities.

10/10 There is no Shari'ah restriction on reconciling between the Company and the party who causes the injury, if such reconciliation is in the interest of the participants, and conforms to the relevant Shari'ah rulings.

11. Indemnity

11/1  The participant shall receive either the loss, he incurred because of the injury, or the insurance amount; whichever is less, and as per regulations.

11/2 The participant  should not receive both the indemnity  and the compensation  from other parties for injury caused to him.

11/3 In Property Insurance, indemnity should be confined to what has been provided for in the regulations, and may comprise subsidiary losses that can be appropriately estimated according to the actual injury.

12. Insurance Surplus

12/1  The insurance surplus is part ofthe assets ofthe insurance account and should be disposed of according to what has been stated in item 5/5 of this Standard.

12/2 Distribution ofthe surplus orpart thereofamong the policyholders should be in one ofthe following forms, provided that the selected form is explicitly mentioned  in the regulations:



685





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

12/2/1 Distribution   of  the  surplus  among  the  policyholders  in proportion to their respective contributions, and regardless of whether the policyholder has received indemnity during the financial period or not.

12/2/2 Distribution of the  surplus  among  the  policyholders  who have not received indemnity during the financial period.

12/2/3 Distribution    of  the   surplus   among   policyholders   after deducting the amounts of indemnity they receive during the same financial period.

12/2/4 Distribution   through  any  other  method  approved  by the
Sharf'ah Supervisory Board.

13. Expiry of Insurance Policy

The insurance policy expires in any of the following cases:

13/1  At the end of the period agreed upon in the insurance policy.  In case of property insurance, it is permissible to stipulate that the contract is automatically renewable unless the participant informs the company, within a specific period before expiry ofthe contract, ofhis desire to cease contract's renewal.

13/2 Termination ofthe policy by the company or the participant, if the policy provides for the right of termination to each of the parties to contract.

13/3  Complete  damage  of the insured  property  (in case of property insurance), without  nullifying the entitlement  of the participant to the indemnity, subject to the contract's conditions.

13/4 Death of the insured person  in case of persons'  (life) insurance, without  nullifying the entitlement of the beneficiary  to the in• surance benefits, subject to the contract's conditions.

14. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 23 Rabi' I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 2
May2005A.D.



686





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah standard on Islamic Insurance was adopted by the Shari'ah
Board in its meeting No.  (16) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah on
7-12 Jumada I, 1427 A.H., corresponding to 3-9 June 2006 A.D.













































687





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board decided in its meeting No. (8) held on 28 Safar - 4
Rabi' I, 1423 A.H., corresponding to 11-16 May 2002 A.D., in Makkah Al• Mukarramah to issue a Sharf'ah Standard on Islamic Insurance.

On 12 Jumada I, 1424 A.H., 12 July 2003 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a draft standard on Islamic Insurance.

In its meeting No. (10) held on 23-24 Jumada II, 1424 A.H., corresponding to 23-24 July 2003 A.D., in Amman, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, the Shari'ah Standards Committee  (1) discussed the Shari'ah study and advised the consultant to incorporate the necessary changes, in the light of the discussions and observations of its members.

The Shari'ah Standards Committee (1) once again discussed the draft of the Standard in its meeting No. (11) held on 25-26 Safar 1425 A.H., corre• sponding to 15-6 April 2004 A.D., in the Kingdom of Bahrain and incor• porated further changes in it. The committee also requested the consultant to review the document  on the light of the discussions and incorporate necessary changes.

A third round of discussions on and amendments  in the draft of the Standard also took place in meeting No. (12)  of the Shari'ah Standards Committee (1) held on 28 Rabi' II, 1425 A.H., corresponding to 16 June
2004 A.D. in Dubai, United Arab Emirates.

The revised version of the Standard was then submitted to the Shari'ah
Board in its meeting No.  (13) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah  on 26
Sha'ban - 1  Ramadan  1425  A.H.,  corresponding to 10-15  October 2004
A.D. and further changes were incorporated in the document.



688





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

In its meeting No.  (14) held in Dubai, United Arab Emirates on 21-24
Rabi' I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 30 April-2 May 2005 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the draft of the Standard and decided, in the light of the discussions and comments of the members, to transfer it to the Sharf'ah Standards Committee (1) for thorough study.

The Shari'ah Standards Committee (1) studied the draft ofthe Standard in its meeting No. (17) held in Kingdom of Bahrain on 4-5Sha'ban 1426 A.H., corresponding to 8-9 September 2005 A.D.

The revised draft of the Standard was again submitted to the Sharf'ah
Board in its meeting No. (15) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, on 22-26
Sha'ban 1426 A.H., corresponding  to 26-30 September 2005 A.D. The Board decided to send the document to concerned experts for review and comments before discussing it in a public hearing.

AAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 1   Safar
1427 A.H., corresponding to 1  March 2006 A.D. More than 30 participants representing central banks, Institutions, accounting firms, Shari'ah scholars, academics and other interested parties attended the session. Several comments and observations were posed, to which the members ofthe Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) duly responded.

In its meeting held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 1  Safar 1427 A.H., corresponding  to 1  March 2006 A.D., the Drafting Committee discussed the comments and observations made in the public hearing and made the changes that it deemed necessary.

In its meeting No.  (16) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah on 7-12
Jumada I,  1427 A.H., corresponding to 3-9 June 2006 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the amendments proposed by the Drafting Committee, incorporated  some changes in the document and approved the Standard (unanimously for some clauses and with the majority for others), as indicated in the minutes ofthe Board's meetings.








689





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


■  Commercial Insurance is prohibited because it involves Gharar (uncer• tainty). In this regard Muslim, Ashab Al-Sunan (compilers of the books of Sunan) and others quoted Abu Hurayrah as having said:  "The Prophet peace be upon him prohibited sales which involve Gharar"•
■  The Fuqaha define Gharar in several ways, which -in brief- indicate that it is a process that has unknown/unrevealed consequences and outco• mes.63
Some contemporary scholars believe that Gharar is similar to betting and gambling."
Resolutions of Fiqh forums  on insurance include the resolution of the
Islamic Fiqh Academy in its first session held  in  1398 A.H., which endorsed a preceding resolution on the subject issued by the Council of Eminent  Shari'ah Scholars of the Kingdom  of Saudi Arabia in its session No. (10) held in Riyadh on 4 April 1397 A.H. A third resolution on the subject was issued by the International  Islamic Fiqh Academy - Resolution No. 9 (9/2).
■  Permissibility of cooperative/mutual/social insurance stems from the fact that it is based on cooperation and donation, rather than on Mu'awadah (exchange contract). It is well known among the Fuqaha (Maliki School)

(2) "Sahih Muslim",  Kitab: AL-Buyu' [3: 1153]; "Sunan Abu  Dawud" [2: 228] (H: 3367); "Sunan  Al  Nasa'r"  [2:  217];  "Sunan  Ibn  Majah  [2:  739];  "Sunan  Al-Tirmidht" [3:  532];  "Sunan  Al-Darimi" [2:  167];  "Al-Muwatta"" [2: 664];  "Musnad Al-Imam Ahmad" [1: 203] and [2: 367 and 439]; "Sunan Al-Bayhaqi" [5: 226] and "Musannaf Ibn Abu  Shaybah" [8:  194], Section  (2).
(3) See: "Sharh AI-'Inayah Ma'a Fath Al-Qadir" [5: 192]; "Tabyin Al-Haqa 'iq" [4: 46]; "Al-Taj
Wa AL-Iklil"  [4:  362]; "Fath AI-'Aziz Bi-Hamish Al-Majmu"  [8:  127];  "Matalib  U AL•
Nuha" [3: 25]; "AI-Qawa'id AL-Nuraniyya(P.  116); "Nazariyyat AI-'Aqd"  (P. 224).  See: "AL-Gharar  Wa Atharahu  Fi AI-'Uqud" by AI-Siddiq Al-Amin Al-Darir (published  by Saleh Kamil Center for University Thesis), (P. 54).
(4) See: Husayn Hamid,  "AI-Gharar" (P. 72).



690





Shari'ah Standard No. (26): Islamic Insurance

that Gharar has no impact on donation contracts. This viewpoint is well supported by a number  of Quranic verses and sayings of the Prophet (peace be upon him) which instruct Muslims to promote cooperation.
■  Consequently,  several resolutions  were issued by Fiqh forums  regar• ding permissibility of cooperative insurance.  Such resolutions include, the resolution of the Islamic Research Academy of Al-Azhar Al-Sharif, the resolution of the Islamic Fiqh Academy of the World Muslim League referred to earlier, and the resolution of the International  Islamic Fiqh Academy, which states that:  'The  contract that respects the origins of Islamic dealings is the cooperative insurance Contract which is based on donation and cooperation ...". The fact that cooperative insurance is permissible, also does not seem to have encountered any dispute among contemporary Muslim Fuqaha.6°
■  Permissibility of cooperative insurance and non-permissibility of com•
mercial insurance is in fact due to the following differences:

a) The conventional insurance contract is a financial Mu'awadah (exchange contract) that aims at making profit out of the insurance operations. Therefore, its permissibility should be judged in the light of the Shari'ah rulings on financial transactions. Consequently, such rulings prohibit the conventional insurance contract, which involves Gharar.

b) In the Islamic insurance contract, the company assumes the role ofthe agent ofthe insurance account, whereas in the commercial insurance contract the company is an original party that signs the contract in its own name.

c) The company in commercial insurance owns the premiums against its commitment  to pay the insurance  amount; whereas in Islamic insurance, it is the insurance account rather than the company that owns the contributions.

d) In Islamic insurance the residual premiums and the returns on them, that  remain  after deduction  of expenses and indemnity  amounts,

(5) Fatawa of the Sharf'ah Advisory Board of Al Rajhi   Banking & Investment Company, Fatwa No. (40).



691





Shari'ah Standard No. (26): Islamic Insurance

become the property  of the policyholders  account,  and constitute a surplus, which can be distributed  among the policyholders. This cannot  be imagined in commercial insurance  where the company owns and receives the premiums as soon as it signs the contract. In commercial insurance, the premiums  constitute part of the revenue and profits of the company.

e) In Islamic insurance, the returns on investment ofthe premium assets belong to the policyholders account, after deduction of the Mudarib share for the company, whereas such returns belong to the company in commercial insurance.

f)  Islamic insurance aims at achieving cooperation among the members of the society, rather than generating profits from the insurance operations, whereas commercial insurance is profit-oriented.

g) The company in Islamic insurance earns profits through investment of its own funds and its share in Mudarabah, as it assumes the role of the Mudarib and the insurance account assumes the role of the Rab al-Mal (owner ofthe capital).

h) In Islamic insurance, the insurer and the participant  are in fact the same person although they differ in recognition, whereas the insurer and the participant are totally different in commercial insurance.

i)  The company in Islamic insurance adheres to the rules of Islamic Sharf'ah and the Fatawa of its Sharf'ah Supervisory Board, while in commercial insurance there are no such commitments.

j)  In Islamic insurance, the allocations from the insurance account, which remain there until the time ofliquidation of the company, are spent on charity purposes, and do not go to shareholders, whereas in commercial insurance such amounts go to shareholders.
■  The Shari'ah ruling that the Islamic insurance contract is an act of dona• tion that both parties are bound to honor, is measured by analogy to what is known in Fiqh as Nihd,"or donation pledge. It has been narrated that

(6) AI-Bukhari in  his "Sahih" [15:  128]  commented on Nihd or Nahd where he said
( ....since Muslims did not see any harm in Nihd, in which the members of       =



692





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

Ali and Ibn Mas'ud said: "A gift, if specifically defined, is binding, whether received or not:' It has also been narrated that Abu Baler and Umar indi• cated that a gift does not become binding before receipt.(7) Malik however reconciled the two viewpoints by indicating that Ali, Ibn Mas'ud and the others seem to have focused on the fact that the contract as such is bin• ding, while Abu Baler and Umar seem to have focused on the fact that the receipt of the gift is a prerequisite of finalizing the contract. The lat• ter viewpoint was justified by the desire to leave no room for an excuse that Umar explicitly mentioned."" The obligatory nature of the donation contract can also be derived from the saying of the Prophet (peace be upon him) that:  "A person who withdraws his gift is like a dog that with• holds its vomit"(9
■  The basis of the Sharf'ah ruling that the company should not guarantee
the insurance  assets is that  the company  is an agent, and the Fuqaha unanimously  agree that  an agent should  not  guarantee  the property except against misconduct, negligence or breach of the contract.
■  The justification for stating the nine principles oflslamic insurance in the
articles ofassociation ofthe company is the need to preserve the element of donation  in the contract  and emphasize it as a basic aspect of the company, and hence preserve the cooperative nature and permissibility ofthe insurance operation. Otherwise, the insurance operation becomes a Mu'awadah transaction, and therefore subject to impact of Gharar as mentioned  earlier. In other words, emphasis on the nine principles  is because they constitute  the fundamental  differences between  Islamic insurance  and  commercial  insurance.  Several Fatawa were issued to

=   of the  group  consume  different   amounts   of the  food  to  which  they  have  equally contributed)  and he narrated some sayings of the Prophet  (peace be upon  him) that support  this practice. In "Fath AL-Bart" [5: 129], Ibn Hajar indicated  that Nihd was an ancient practice ofMuslim travelers who used to contribute equally to the stock offood they need during their journey, and leave each of them free to consume the portion of
the food he needs. At the end of the journey, they distri bute the food leftover among themselves, unless they decide to keep it for another  journey. This is quite similar  to the treatment of the surplus  in Islamic Insurance.
(7) See:  "AL-Muwatta"" [2: 468]; and  "Nasb Al-Rayah" [4:  122].
(8) "Bidayat AL-Mujtahid" [2: 534].
(9) "Sahih AL-Bukhari" [5: 190]; and  "Sahih Muslim" (H:  1622].



693





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

demonstrate these  differences  including, Fatwa No.  (12/11)  issued  by the  12 Seminar  on Islamic Economics  of the Al Baraka  Group, Fatwa No.  (42/3)  issued  by the  Shari'ah Supervisory   Board  of the  Al Rajhi Company, Fatwa of the Shari'ah Board of Faisal Islamic Bank and Fatwa of the Islamic insurance Company of Jordan.
■  The general framework ofthe contract and the nature ofits conditions have been set up along the lines of binding  contracts  in Islamic jurisprudence, and the peculiar  characteristics  of the  insurance  contracts  as far  as the insured is concerned.
• The ruling that the insurer and the insured must fulfill their commitments is
based on the Sharf'ah prerequisite ofhonoring contracts. Since the insurance contract is a binding contract, all its conditions should be honored  unless they violate the rules of Islamic Shari'ah. Such reasoning is well supported by various Quranic Verses and sayings of the Prophet (peace be upon him) that explicitly instruct  Muslims to honor  their  contracts  and conditions. In this regard, Allah, the Almighty, says:  {"O You who believe! Fulfill (all) obligations.."}. The Prophet (peace be upon him) also says "Muslims are
at their conditions".3
■  The  company  could  manage  the  insurance  account  against  fee or free of charge because  the relationship  here  is viewed  as agency, which  the Fuqaha unanimously approve, with or without remuneration. The Fatawa in this regard comprise  those of the  12 Seminar  on Islamic Economics of the Al Baraka Group  (Fatwa No.  (12/11), the resolution  of the Islamic Fiqh Academy of the Muslim World League - Makkah  Al-Mukarramah
(Fatwa No. 961), and Fatwa No. (51) of the Council of Eminent  Scholars of Saudi Arabia.
• The basis ofassigning the investment ofthe assets ofthe insurance fund to the company is the Mudarabah contract, which the Fuqaha unanimously declare as permissible. Arrangement of investment in this manner  entails

(10) See:  "Fatawa Al-Ta 'min,  Dallah  Al Baraka  Group,  Dr. Abdul-Sattar  Abu Ghuddah and Dr. Izzul-Din  Khoja (eds.), (pp. 99-108).
(11)  [Al-Ma' idah (The Table):  l].
(12) Related by AI-Bukhari in his "Sahih" [4: 451]; and AI-Tirmidhi with "Tuhfat Al-Ahwazi"
[4: 584]. AI-Tirmidhi deemed it a good, authentic Hadith.



694





Shari'ah Standard No. (26): Islamic Insurance

specification of a profit  share for each party, and  entitlement  of the insurance fund to its respective share. The relevant Fatawa in this regard include the Fatwa of the Sharf'ah Supervisory Board of Faisal Islamic Bank,(  Fatwa No.  (12/11)  of the 12  Seminar on Islamic Economics of the Al Baraka Group and the Shari'ah Standard No. (13): Mudarabah.
■  The emphasis on honoring commitments in general - including commitment of the company to furnish Qard Hasan to the insurance account - is based on the Shari'ah requirement of honoring pledges that are binding to either of the two parties. This viewpoint to which some leading Fuqaha subscribe is well supported by Qur'an, Sunnah and reported Muslim practice, such as the divine Quranic instruction:  {"..Fulfill (all) obligations.."} has been taken by the Fuqaha to comprise any Shari'ah-accepted commitment of the Muslim. There are also several sayings of the Prophet (peace be upon him) which indicate that Muslims are bound to honor their contracts, covenants and pledges.{  Several resolutions of Shari'ah forums and Shari'ah Boards were also issued in this connection including, resolution No. 40 -41 (2-5/3) of the International Islamic Fiqh Academyand the Fatwa of the Shari'ah Supervisory Board ofthe Islamic Insurance Company ofJordan.9
■  The ruling that  responsibility  of providing  the evidence lies with the participant depends on the general rules in the Qur'an, the Sunnah and the opinion of the Ulema that evidence should be established by the claimant. This has been indicated in several Fatawa including Fatwa No. (14/6) ofthe United Sharf'ah Board of Al Baraka Group.
• Permissibility of the two types of Islamic insurance (mentioned  in this Standard) rests on the various evidences ofpermissibility ofIslamic insu• rance in general, as discussed earlier, and are supported by various Fatawa of Sharf'ah Boards. Such Fatawa include Fatwa No. 2/9 ofthe 2 AI Bara• ka Seminar on Islamic Economics, Fatwa No. 10/3/5 ofthe 10 Al Baraka seminar on Islamic Economics,  and other Fatwa issued by the Shari'ah

(13) See:  Chapters on Mudarabah in  books of various schools of Fiqh,  and the term
"Mudarabah" in the Kuwaiti Encyclopedia.
(14) See:  "Mabda' AL-Rida Fi AI-'Uqud: Dirasah  Muqaranh"  (Principle of Consent in
Contracts: A Comparative Study) and its references.
(IS) See: Magazine of the International Islamic Fiqh Academy, Issue No. (5), (2/754- 965). (16) "Fatawa Al-Ta 'min", (P. 106).



695





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

Supervisory Boards ofDubai Islamic Bank, Kuwait Finance House, Qatar
Islamic Bank and the Islamic Insurance Company - Jordan.(
■  The rulings relating to the contract  as such are based on the general principles of contracts  in Islamic Shari'ah, which emphasize avoidance of fraud and deceit and the need to observe the time limits indicated in the contracts. Shari'ah rulings on compensation have also been resorted to in this connection, in addition to the Fatawa and resolutions issued by various forums such as the Islamic Fiqh Academy of the Muslim World League, the Supreme Council of Ulema of Saudi Arabia and the Sharf'ah boards of Islamic banks and Islamic insurance companies.9
■  The jurisdictions  of the  company are determined  on the basis of its articles ofassociation, the various documents that govern the contractual relationship, the general principles ofcontracts and conditions, insurance conventions, and some Fatawa of Shari'ah boards.
■  The rules that regulate the relationship between the company and the policyholders  are based on the articles of association,  which consider this relationship as an agency contract (remunerated or free of charge) for the management ofthe insurance operations, and Mudarabah for the investment of the insurance assets.
■  Indemnity is based on the general Shari'ah directives emphasizing the principle that "one should neither tolerate harm nor cause it to others9 as well as the general principles and rules of Fiqh that advocate fair, and at the same time, non-obsessive indemnification for injury. Furthermore, inferences on indemnity could also be drawn from the cooperative nature of this donation-oriented  contract, in addition to some Fatawa such as Fatwa No. (3) of the 10 Al Baraka Seminar on Islamic Economics, and the various Fatawa of the Shari'ah boards of Islamic banks and Islamic insurance companies.

(17) "Fatawa Al-Ta 'min" (pp. 193-206).
(18) ibid.
(19) This Hadith  has been related by Malik in "AL-Muwatta"", "Kitab AI-Aqdiyah"; Ahmad in "Musnad AL-Imam Ahmad" [1: 313] and [5: 527]; and Ibn Majah in his "AL-Hashiyah" [2: 782].
(20)  "Fatawa Al-Ta 'min, (P.  153).



696





Shari'ah Standard No. (26): Islamic Insurance

■  Treatment of the insurance surplus is based on the cooperative nature of the contract and the practice ofthe Sahabah [companions of the Prophet (peace be upon him)] with regard to Nihd, as reported by Bukhari.3
■  Possibility of contract termination  stems from the fact that the insurance
contract is a time-specific contract, and therefore it expires at the end of its stipulated period just like Ijarah (hiring). The insurance contract also expires on the damage of the insured property (or death of the insured), as there will be no object of commitment.





























(21) Al-Bukhari in his "Sahih" [15:  128)  commented on Nihd or Nahd  where he said ( ....since Muslims did not see any harm in Nihd, in which the members ofthe group consume different amounts of the food to which they have equally contributed) and he narrated some sayings of the Prophet (peace be upon him) that support this practice. In "Fath AL-Bart" [5:  129], Ibn Hajar indicated that Nihd was an ancient practice of Muslim travelers who used to contribute equally to the stock of food they need during their journey,  and leave each of them free to consume the portion of the food he needs. At the end ofthe journey, they distribute the food leftover among themselves, unless they decide to keep it for another journey. This is quite similar to the treatment of the surplus in Islamic Insurance.



697





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Premium

It is the amount of the contribution, which the participant donates, along with its related profits, for the benefit of the insurance scheme.

Insurance Amount

It is the amount paid by the company out ofthe insurance account at the occurrence of the risk insured against.

Risk Insured Against

It is the probable, legally acceptable, accident.

Commercial Insurance

It is a contract between an insured party and a technical insuring body, stipulating that the former pays the latter a specific number  of financial installments or a lump sum amount, against the commitment of the latter to bear a risk that can be insured against, through payment of an estimated financial indemnity to the insured or the beneficiary,  on the occurrence of the risk.  [Clause No.  (747) of the Egyptian law, Clause No. (773) of the Kuwaiti Law and Clause No. (983) ofthe Iraqi Law].

Cooperative Insurance

A collective insurance contract is a contract whereby each participant undertakes to pay a specific amount of money as donation to indemnify any member of the group who encounters the risk insured against.

Islamic Insurance

It is a kind of cooperative insurance, which covers all types of risks, un• der the management ofa specialized company that adheres to the rules and principles ofShari'ah. In this sense, Islamic insurance differs from coopera•



698





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islami c Insurance

tive insurance as the latter only covers a specific group ofbeneficiaries who might encounter risks, for instance, merchants, sailors and the like while Islamic insurance is available to the general public. Islamic insurance also differs from cooperative Insurance with regard to adherence to the rules and principles of Islamic Shari'ah as well as in some technical aspects per• taining to premiums. In cooperative insurance, premiums may be variable at the beginning; whereas in organized Islamic insurance, premiums  are specific due to use of precise statistical studies.

Mutual Insurance, the Alternate to Life Insurance

It is the insurance that covers the risks ofdeath, inability, injury or illness, for the individual or the group, through payment ofthe insurance amount to the participant or the beneficiary, as per the agreement

Surplus

The Surplus comprises of residual premiums  of the participants  (the insured) in addition to the reserves and profits, after deducting all expenses and indemnity amounts (paid or payable during the same year). The residual amount, thus computed, is considered as surplus, rather than profit.

Gharar

It is what one cannot predict its unrevealed/unknown consequences. Something that may occur/materialize or may not@3,

Participant

The Participant  is a person  who  accepts the  cooperative  insurance scheme, signs the insurance policy and undertakes  to observe its conse• quent commitments. It may be referred as the insured, the insured for and the policyholder.

Insurance Account

It is the account established by the company by virtue of its articles of association, to accommodate the premiums of the participants and the returns thereon as well as the reserves. Such account has an independent

(22) See:  "AI-Gharar Wa Atharahu Fi AI-'Uqud" (P. 53).



699





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

financial liability towards its own claims and commitments, though it is represented by the company for its all affairs. This account is also known as the insurance fund, the policyholders account or the portfolio  of the participants group.



















































700

























