Shari'ah Standard No. (28)



Banking Services in Islamic Banks












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                             723
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................        724

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               724
2. Types of Banking Services and Their Shari'ah Status...........................       724
3. Date of Issuance of the Standard                                                              727
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        728
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        729
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard...................................         731
































721






Sharf'ah Standard No. (28): Bankin g Services in Islami c Banks

IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


The purpose ofthis standard is to indicate banking services provided by Islamic financial Institutions (Institution/Institutions)," and the Shari'ah opinion on the fees charged for such services.

































(1) The word {Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



723





Shar f'ah   Stan dar d N o.  (28):  B ankin  g Servi ces in Islamic Banks





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This  standard  covers the  most  important banking  services that  do not involve lending and borrowing,  and which the Institutions  render to their customers, directly or through  other parties, with the aim of facilitating internal and external operations and activities performed by these customers.

It does not cover loan and investment services, or other banking services for which separate Shari'ah standards have already been issued, such as trading in currencies, debit and credit cards, investment accounts, and investment Sukuk.

2. Types of Banking Services and Their Shari'ah Status

Institutions may provide banking services against fees payable in lump sum or as a percentage share of the value of the service in question, as indicated in the following cases:

2/1  Custodian services

Institutions may receive Shari'ah-accepted documents and financial papers  from their  customers  as a custodian  of such documents/ financial papers, and may charge fees for such services.

2/2 Contracting agency services

A customer  may use the institution  as an agent for concluding contracts such as sale, purchase, and lease contracts,  against a fee payable to the institution.

2/3 Subscription arrangement services

2/3/1  The institution may act as an agent ofthe founding shareholders of a Shari'ah-accepted and technically licensed joint stock company, in performing the various steps ofthe public issue, or issuing new



724





Sharf'ah Standard No. (28): Bankin g Services in Islamic Banks

shares to increase the capital of the company, and may receive fees for such services. However, the fees thus earned by the Institution should not comprise any remuneration for extending credit, if it happens to be part of the service.

2/3/2  The  Institution  may  arrange,  and  receive  fees  for,  engaging a third party to underwrite the subscription. The Institution may also underwrite  the  subscription  itself, without  charging  any fees for the mere act of underwriting. However, the Institution may  charge the  actual  expenses it incurs  in  providing  other services like conducting  studies or marketing  the shares.  [see Shari'ah Standard No.  (5) on Guarantees, item 6/7]

2/4 Services of conducting studies and consultancies

2/4/1 The institution  may conduct,  against a fee or free of charge, feasibility studies or other studies relating to issuance of shares.

2/4/2 The institution  may act as an agent of its customers, for a fee or free of charge, in performing services that relate to real estate properties  (residential buildings, commercial  blocks, offices, etc.) as well as movable assets.

2/5 Collection and payment services

2/5/1  The institution  may accept requests of its customers to collect their dues with, or pay their commitments to other parties. For instance,  it can perform  collection of cheques, debt notes, and promissory notes from debtors, or vouchers of shares and Sukuk owned  by the  customers,  and  deposit  the  proceeds  in  their accounts. It can also make payments on behalf of its customers and charge their accounts.  For all such services, the Institution
may receive fees from the customers or their agents.

2/5/2 The  institution   may pay wages and  salaries on behalf  of its customers.

2/5/3 The institution  may execute standing  collection and payment orders.



725





Shar f'ah   Stan dar d N o.  (28):  B ankin  g Servi ces in Islamic Banks

2/5/4 The institution  should refrain from collection when it realiz• es that it involves an impermissible  practice, or leads to dis• counting  of a commercial  paper. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (16) on Commercial Paper, item 5]

2/6 Accounts services

2/6/1 The institution may provide additional services to the owners of its investment or current accounts when they desire so, and charge fees for such services.

2/6/2 The institution may provide free services to the owners of its investment  or current  accounts, provided  that  the  services rendered  to the owners of the current  accounts are not set as a precondition or constitute a traditionally  observed prereq• uisite for opening the account. [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (19) on Loan (Qard), item 10/2]

2/7 Services of safe deposit vaults

2/7/1  The institution may provide the services of leasing safe deposit vaults to its customers. This is done through signing a contract according to which the Institution allocates a safe deposit vault within its premises for the customer to use against a specific fee. The deal here is based on ljarah (hiring) contract that entitles the customer to the vault's usufruct.

2/7/2 The institution is responsible for ensuring the safety ofthe vault.
However, it does not guarantee the safety of items kept in vault except in case of misconduct or negligence in keeping the vault.

2/8 Services of cards and their related bodies

See Shari'ah Standard No. (2) on Debit Card, Charge Card and Credit
Card.

2/9 Zakah account services

See Sharf'ah Standard No. (35) on Zakah, item 2/2.

2/10 Suretyship services

See Sharf'ah Standard No. (5) on Guarantees, item 6



726





Sharf'ah Standard No. (28): Bankin g Services in Islamic Banks

2/11   Cheques services

See Shari'ah Standard No.  (16) on Commercial Papers, item 3/3 and item 7.

3. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 12 Jumada I, 1427 A.H., corresponding to 8
June 2006 A.D.














































727





Shar f'ah   Stan dar d N o.  (28):  B ankin  g Servi ces in Islamic Banks





Adoption of the Standard


The  Sharf'ah  standard  on  Banking  Services  in  Islamic Banks was adopted by the Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. (16) held in Al-Madinah Al -Munawwarah  on 7-12  Jumada  I,  1427  A.H.,  corresponding  to 3-8
June 2006 A.D.











































728





Sharf'ah Standard No. (28): Bankin g Services in Islamic Banks





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board decided in its meeting No.  (10) held on 2-7  Rabi' I,  1424 A.H., corresponding to 3-8 May 2003 A.D., in AI-Madinah Al• Munawwarah to issue a Sharf'ah Standard on Banking Services and Facilities in Islamic Banks.

On 29 Safar 1425 A.H., corresponding to 19 April 2004 A.D., the Sharf'ah Standards Committee (2) decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a draft standard on Banking Services and Facilities in Islamic Banks.

In the meeting of the Shari'ah Standards Committee (2) on 14-15 Safar
1426 A.H., corresponding to 24-25 March 2005 A.D., in the Kingdom of Bahrain,  the committee discussed the study and advised the consultant to incorporate the necessary changes, in the light of the discussions and observations of the Committee members.

In the meeting No. (17) of the Shari'ah Standards Committee (1) held on 8-9 Sha'ban 1426 A.H., corresponding to 8-9 September 2005 A.D., in the Kingdom Of Bahrain, the Committee discussed the draft standard and introduced necessary changes therein.

The Sharf'ah Board discussed,  in its meeting No.  (15) held on 22-26
Sha'ban  1426  A.H.,  corresponding  to  26-30  September 2005  A.D.,  in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, the draft of the Standard, and decided, in the light of the discussions and observations of the members,  to send it to Shari'ah Standards Committee (1) for review.

A joint committee comprising the members of Shari'ah Standards Com•
mittees (1) and (2) discussed the Standard in a meeting held on 1  Safar 1427
A.H., corresponding to 1  March 2006 A.D., in the Kingdom of Bahrain, and incorporated necessary changes.



729





Shar f'ah   Stan dar d N o.  (28):  B ankin  g Servi ces in Islamic Banks

The revised draft of the Standard was submitted to the Shari'ah Board in its meeting  No.  (16)  held in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah  on 7-12
Jumada I, 1427  A.H., corresponding to 3-8 June, 2006 A.D. The Sharf'ah
Board made further  changes in the document  and decided to send it to the concerned experts for review and observations before discussing it in a public hearing.

AAOIFI then held, in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 6 Rajah 1427 A.H., corresponding to 31  July,  2006, the public hearing which was attended by more than 30 participants representing central banks, Institutions, accounting firms,  Shari'ah scholars,  university teachers and  other  interested parties. Several observations were made in the session to which the members of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) duly responded.

The Shari'ah Board adopted, in its meeting No. (17) held in Makkah Al• Mukarramah on 26 Shawwal - 1 Dhul-Qa'dah, 1427 A.H., corresponding to
18-23 November, 2006 A.D., the Standard (unanimously for some clauses and with the majority for others), as indicated in the minutes ofthe Board's meetings.





























730





Sharf'ah Standard No. (28): Bankin g Services in Islamic Banks





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


•  It is permissible for the Institutions  to provide banking services that do not involve interest-based lending and borrowing, because such services serve a permissible interest ofthe clients.
•  Institutions may charge fees for providing banking services, because the
fees so charged constitute a remuneration which the Institutions  deserve for the tasks they perform, since it is permissible in Shari'ah to get reward for performing tasks that result in permissible benefits to others.
•  The fee charged by the institutions may be a lump sum amount or a percen•
tage of the value of the service, because when the percentage remuneration is calculated it becomes like the lump sum amount































731























