Shari'ah Standard No. (23)



Agency and the Act of an
Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                             609
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................        610

1. Scope of the Standard..............................................................................       610
2. Agency.......................................................................................................         610
3. Conditions on the Agency Parties                                                            612
4. Types of Agency........................................................................................        613
5. Commitments  of the Principal and the Agent.....................................       616
6. Stipulations on the Agent                                                                617
7. Expiry of Agency......................................................................................       619
8. Act of an Uncommissioned  Agent (Fodooli)........................................       620
9. Date oflssuance of the Standard.............................................................   620
Adoption ofthe Standard......................................................................        621
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        622
Appendix (b):  The Sharf'ah Basis for the Standard.....................................       624





















607








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


The purpose of this Standard is to clarify the Shari'ah rulings that govern the activities of Islamic financial Institutions  (Institution/Institutions)in appointingagents orbecoming agents ofothers, whether in arranging contracts and disposing of property,  or undertaking procedural tasks, or managing/ investing funds. The Standard also indicates the underlying conditions of Agency, elaborates on its various forms, spells out its repercussions, and outlines the responsibilities of both the Principal and the Agent. Moreover-, the Standard aims to embark upon the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent "Fodooli" and the Shari'ah rulings thereon.























(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



609





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers agency and the acts of an uncommissioned agent in concluding  contracts  on financial transactions (such as sale, Ijarah  and compensatory reconciliation),   disposing  of assets, providing  services and  conducting  practical  acts  such  as receipt,  payment  and  delivery. The  Standard  also covers areas such  as fund  management,  real estate and investment  agency. However, it does not cover agency and the act of an uncommissioned agent in several other affairs oflife such as worshipping (like Zak.ah, for which  there  is a separate  standard), personal  affairs, penalty  affairs,  legal prosecution/advocacy,  and  documentary  credits (which have also been dealt with in a separate standard).

2. Agency

2/1  Definition,  permissibility and characteristics of agency

2/1/1   Agency is the act of one party  delegating the other  to act on its behalf in what can be a subject matter of delegation and it is, thus, permissible.

2/1/2 Agency is, basically, a non-binding  contract for both the parties thereto. However, it may sometimes become a binding contract. [see 3/4 below]

2/2  Basic elements of agency

2/2/1   The basic elements of agency include the form,  the subject matter of agency, and the two parties to the contract (the principal and the agent).

2/2/2 The form  of agency comprises  any act that  customary  prac• tices traditionally consider  a delegation  of the right to acting by someone on behalf the other. Such delegation comprises of



610





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

offer and acceptance which has no standard form of wording and may be expressed through  utterance  of words, writing, messaging or gesture. In accepting non-paid agency, silence is also considered as sufficient acceptance, while a negative re• sponse is indicative of rejection of agency.

2/2/3 Agency may take place in any ofthe following forms:

2/2/3/1 Immediate  Agency,  as usually  the  case,  where  the contract becomes effective as soon as it is entered into.

2/2/3/2 Conditional Agency: where the validity of the contract is made subject to fulfillment of a certain condition, for instance when a debtor agrees to put his own assets under the management ofhis creditor in case ofdefault

2/2/3/3 Future Agency: where the contract becomes valid only at a specific date in the future.

2/2/3/4 Agency, whether  free or limited,  shall be subject to specific conditions. In case offree agency, consideration should be given to customary practices,  interest and the state ofthe principal.

2/2/4 While  conditionality and limitation  may be resorted  to in concluding agency contracts, they may also be confined to the disposal of the subject matter of agency. In this case, though the agency contract is immediately effective, disposal is made subject to the fulfillment of a specific condition, such as re• sorting back to the principal before disposal. The conditions set by the principal should be observed such as offering him a guarantee or lien.

2/2/5 The subject matter ofagency is for what the contract is entered into.  [see item 3/3]

2/2/6 The two parties to the contract are the principal and the agent
[see items 3/1 and 3/2]



611





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

3. Conditions on the Agency Parties

3/1  Conditions on the principal

3/1/1 The principal should possess legal capacity to enter into con•
tract.

3/1/2 The principal should have the right to dispose of the asset in question. Agency, therefore, is not acceptable from a legally incapable person like a lunatic or an indiscriminating  minor. A partially capable person, such as a discriminating  minor, may appoint an agent for matters that result in absolute benefit to him, such as accepting donations from others, but he cannot appoint an gent in harmful matters like making donations. In acts that may be harmful or useful, such as buying and selling, a partially capable person may appoint an agent, but the acts of that agent remain pending the approval of the principal's guardian or whosoever enjoys the similar right on behalf of the principal.

3/2 Conditions on the agent

3/2/1 The agent should have full legal capacity, because a lunatic or an indiscriminating minor  cannot become an agent. A dis• criminating  minor  may become an agent, provided  that all the contractual  commitments  are the sole responsibility  of principal.

3/2/2 The agent should be aware of his status as an agent. When somebody acted on behalf of another and later on, the former comes to know that he is an agent of the latter, the preceding act does not fall under  the agency contract. If, however, he does so with the intention of performing the act regardless of agency, the case should be subjected to the rules governing the act of an uncommissioned agent (Fodooli). [see item 8]

3/3 Conditions on the subject matter of agency

3/3/1 The subject matter of agency should be known to the agent.
However, minor Jahalah (unknowability) that does not lead to



612





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

dispute, or temporary uncertainty, may be dispensed  with.  It can also be overlooked when, in absolute agency, the principal authorizes the agent to channel the funds in any form of investment Nevertheless, the agent should observe the interest of the principal, as well as the norms  and customary practices if necessary.

3/3/2 It should  be  owned  by the  principal, or he has  the  right  of deposing thereof.

3/3/3  It should be something that can be disposed ofthrough agency.
This includes all types of financial contracts  and dealings that a person  can perform personally.  Any contract  that  a person is permitted by Sharf'ah to be involved  in personally  can be performed through  agency.

It should not involve a Sharf'ah-banned practice, like trading in impermissible  commodities  or committing usurious lending.
4. Types of Agency

4/1  Agency may take the following forms:

4/1/1 Specific versus  general  agency.  General  agency  includes  all methods  of disposing  of assets provided  that  the  interest of the principal  and the customary  practices  are well observed. Disposal  of assets here  does  not  include  making  donations, unless the principal  authorizes the agent to do so.

4/1/2 Limited  versus  absolute  agency.  Absolute  agency  is bound by customary  practices  and the interest  of the principal.  It is not permissible in absolute agency to sell at less or buy at more than  the market price,  nor is it permissible to perform  barter and deferred payment  sales, except with the prior  consent  of principal.

4/1/3  Paid versus non-paid agency.  [see item 4/2]

4/1/4 Binding versus non-binding agency.  [see item 4/3]

4/1/5 Temporary versus continuous  agency.  [see item 4/4]



613





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

4/2 Paid agency

4/2/ 1  Paid agency is permissible in Shari'ah, whether remuneration is explicitly stipulated in the contract or ascertained in accordance with the customary  practices, as when the agent doses provide such service except for remuneration.

4/2/2 When agency is paid, it falls under the Shari'ah rulings on Ijarah. [see item 4/3]

4/2/3 The  amount  payable  as remuneration for agency  should  be known, whether in lump sum or as a share of a specific amount of income. It may  also be defined  in terms  of an amount  of income  to be known  in the future, as when  remuneration is linked  to an indicator  that  may be quoted  at the beginnings of different  intervals  of time.  However,  it is not  permissible to leave remuneration for agency undetermined and allow the agent to take an unspecified share from the entitlements  of the principal.

4/2/4 When  remuneration  for agency  is not specified, it may  be measured in terms  of the prevailing  market rate  for similar effort.

4/2/5  Remuneration for agency may be any gain in excess of a specific amount of output of the operation, or a share of the output.

4/2/6 A certain  share of the output  may be added to the specific re•
muneration of the agent, as a motivation.

4/2/7 When  the agent, for no reasonable excuse, refrains from  car• rying on agency that he has been paid for, and the work he has done was beneficial, he becomes entitled to the remuneration commensurate with the part ofwork done, and within the limits of the contract value for that part of work. The agent in this case is bound to indemnify the principal for any actual loss resulting from his refusal to continue the work.

When the principal, for no reasonable excuse, forces the agent to discontinue  the work before the end of the agency period,



614





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

the  agent  becomes  entitled  to  the  full remuneration agreed upon.

When the principal, for a valid reason, forces the agent to dis• continue  the work before the  end  of the  contract,  the  agent becomes entitled to remuneration for that part of work he has already performed.

4/2/8 Damage  of the subject matter  of agency does not relieve the principal from paying remuneration to the agent for the part of the work the latter has already performed. When the damage occurs because of misconduct  or negligence of the agent, he is bound  to indemnify  the principal  for it.

4/3 Binding agency

Agency is, basically, not binding, because each of the two parties has the right to revoke the contract without denying its effects that may continue  after revocation. However, agency becomes binding  in the following cases:

4/3/1  When  it involves rights of others, as when the mortgagor  ap• points  the mortgagee  as an agent, or when  the mortgagor  is authorized  to seize the mortgaged  asset or sell it on maturity. Agency in the latter case is binding to the mortgagor  (the debt• or).  A further  example of binding  agency is a case when  the owner of an income-generating asset assigns the collection of his entitlements to an agent manager.

4/3/2 When  agency is a paid agency.  [see item 4/2]

4/3/3 When the agent commences tasks that cannot be discontinued or phased  out without  causing injury  to him  or to the princi• pal. Agency in this case remains binding  until it is possible to suspend  the work,  or phase  it out without  causing injury  to any of the two parties.

4/3/4 When  the principal  or the agent undertakes  not to revoke the contract within  a certain period.



615





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

4/4 Temporary agency

4/4/1  Basically, agency has no time limit beyond  which the contract becomes  no longer valid, because the agent can be terminated at any time. The two parties, however, may agree on a certain period after which the agency becomes invalid without a request from any of them to revoke the contract

4/4/2 The  effect of specification of a time  limit  for agency  is con• fined to restrain the agent from commencing new operations subsequently.

4/4/3 Unless the contract stipulates otherwise, the agent may com• mence new operations during the contract period even if the effects of such operations will succeed  the period of the con• tract.

5. Commitments of the Principal and the Agent

5/1  Commitments of the principal

5/1/1  In contract of procurement agency, the price and other expenses should be borne by the principal Besides the price ofpurchased commodity, the principal should reimburse the agent expenses such as those of transportation, storage, taxation, maintenance and  insurance. In paid  agency, such  expenses  should  not  be stated in the  contract as payable  by the  agent  now or in the future.

5/1/2 In paid agency, the principal should  pay the agent the amount of remuneration agreed upon  in the contract.  [ see item 4/2]
5/2 Commitments of the agent

The agent is considered as a trustee in holding the asset in question, and  therefore, he is not  bound to indemnify the principal for that asset in case of damage. He shall be held responsible for indemnity only when the damage results from his own misconduct, negligence or breach of terms  or stipulations of the contract. Breach of contract for this purpose does not include  acts that  serve the interest of the



616





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

principal, like selling at a higher or buying at a lower price. In this regard, Shari'ah Standard No.  (5) on Guarantees  indicates  under item 2/2/2 the following:

"It is not permissible  to combine agency and personal  guarantees in one contract  at the same time (i.e. the same party acting in the capacity of an agent on one hand and acting as a guarantor  on the other hand), because such a combination  conflicts with the nature of these contracts. In addition, a guarantee given by a party acting as an agent in respect of an investment turns the transaction  into an interest-based loan, since the capital ofthe investment is guaranteed in addition  to the proceeds  of the investment, (i.e. as though  the investment  agent had taken a loan and repaid it with an additional sum which is tantamount to Riba). But ifa guarantee is not stipulated in the agency contract and the agent voluntarily provides a guarantee to his principals  independently of the agency contract, the agent becomes a guarantor  in a different  capacity from that of agent.  In this case, such an agent will remain liable as guarantor even if he is discharged from acting as agent.

6. Stipulations on the Agent

6/1  Performing deals with one's self and relatives

6/1/1  When an agent conducts deals with his ascendant or descendant relatives, who are neither under his guardianship, nor are the agent's spouse, the deal is permissible unless it encompasses injustice or favoritism. In case of deals that involve relatives who are under the guardianship of the agent, or deals that involve the agent's spouse, the agent should obtain the consent of the principal.

6/1/2 An agent should not conduct deals with his own self or with his son/daughter who is still under his guardianship, or with his partner (Sharik) in the same contract.

6/1/3 The agent should not act for both parties to the contract.

6/1/4 An agent may purchase what he has bought for the principal, by way of offer and acceptance. The deal should be concluded



617





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

in such a way that  the guarantees  stemming  from the agency contract and the sale contract  are kept separate. After the completion ofthe conclusion ofthe sale contract, the commodity becomes  under   the  guarantee  of the  purchaser/agent.    [see Shari'ah Standard No. (8) on Murabahah  - item 3/1/5)

6/2 Monitoring of the provisions and rights of the contract

Monitoring the provisions of contract is the responsibility of principal, whereas monitoring  the  activities stipulated  in  the  contract  (except donations that should be assigned to the principal) is the responsibility of agent. Nevertheless,  the  principal,  by virtue  of ownership,  may pursue the agent's activities.
6/3 Breach of contract stipulations

6/3/1 When  the agent breaches the contract  in a way that does not serve the interest of the principal, the latter is free to maintain the contract or declare it invalid. Breach of the contract on the part of the agent may relate to the subject matter  of agency or part thereof, the price, on spot or deferred payment, possession (purchase),  or transfer  of ownership  (sale). [see items (8) and
5/2]

6/3/2 When the agent breaches the contract by purchasing  at a price that exceeds both the market price and the price set forth by the principal, he should compensate the principal for the difference between the purchase price and the market price.  Similarly,  if the breach  is by selling at less than  the price specified by the principal,  compensation  should be for the difference between the selling price and the market  price. Hence, the case here is similar to what happens  in Mudarabah  or investment  agency whereby selling is stipulated to take place for a profit not less than a specified proportion. And hence, the agent (or the Mudarib)  doesn't guarantee that proportion, but his guarantee is limited to any amount less than the price of a similar fungible good.



618





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

6/4 Appointing a sub-agent

The agent has no right to appoint a sub-agent except with the permis• sion of the principal. Once a sub-agent is appointed, his termination does not spontaneously follow the termination  of the first agent, but the principal can terminate him.

6/5 Appointing more than one agent

When more than one agent are appointed in the same contract, none of them  should become  the sole decision-maker  unless with the authorization  of principal.  If they have been appointed by separate contracts, each ofthem has the right to discharge their responsibilities independently, unless the principal requires joint action from them.

7. Expiry of Agency

7/1  The agency contract expires in the following cases:

7/1/1  The contract expires when the principal or the agent dies or loses legal capacity or when the Institution undergoes bankruptcy or liquidation.

7/1/2 When the principal terminates the agent or the latter resigns.
In case of termination, the principal has to inform the agent [see item 4/2/7], for compensation ofloss resulting from refusal by the agent to continue the work, or forced discontinuation of work imposed by the principal before the expiration ofcontract or agency term, in regard to the consequent remuneration  or damage compensation.

7/1/3 When the agent completes the work assigned to him in fixed•
task agency or the principal performs the task in question.

7/1/4 When the principal no longer owns the asset in question or the principal has lost the right of disposing thereof. Agency also expires if the principal has performed the work, or the subject matter of agency no longer exists.

7/1/5 At the occurrence ofthe incidence that has been stipulated for ipso facto expiry ofthe agency.



619





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

7/ 1/6 At the expiry of the contract term in temporary agency. In this case, the contract  may be extended to the required term when necessary.  [ see item 4/3]

7/2  Interminable agency remains  effective  even after the  death  of the principal  or liquidation of the Institution. It continues  up to the end of the subject matter  of agency.

8. Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

8/1  An uncommissioned agent (Fodooli) is a person who discharges (in the  absence  of any need  or urgency) the  affairs  of others without being an agent or having a right to do so by virtue of Sharf'ah.  The deal becomes subject to the rulings  on the Fodooli, even when  the acts of a real owner makes him appear an agent.

8/2  The approval or denial ofa contract concluded byan uncommissioned agent  is subject  to the  discretion  of the  owner. Approval  of such contract by the owner should also precede revocation of the contract by either  of the  two parties; otherwise, a new  contract  has  to be initiated.  If the owner  of the property  does not  approve the act of
the uncommissioned agent, the act becomes binding  to the latter, if
he did not declare at the time of signing the contract that he had no authority.

8/3  The rulings on the uncommissioned agent are applicable to all financial contracts, including compensatory  contracts like sale, purchase, rent and hiring contracts, donations by way of gift, and investment agency contracts.

8/4 When the owner ofthe asset approves the act ofthe uncommissioned agent, the contract  becomes  effective, and subject to all rulings  on agency. The approval  shall be retroactively  effective, based  on the date of such an act.

9. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 23 Rabi' I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 30
April 2005 A.D.



620





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted the Shari'ah Standard on Agency and the Act ofAn Uncommissioned Agent in its meeting No. (14) held in Dubai on 21•
22 Rabi' I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 30 April- 2 May 2005 A.D.













































621





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board decided in its meeting No. (10), held on 2-7 Rabi' I, 1424 A.H., corresponding to 3-8 May 2001 A.D., in Al-Madinah Al• Munawwarah to issue a Sharf'ah Standard on Agency and  the  Act of Uncommissioned Agent.

On 17 Sha'ban 1423 A.H., corresponding  to 13 October 2002 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee decided to commission a Sharf'ah consultant to prepare a draft standard  on Agency and the Act of Uncommissioned Agent.

In its meeting No.  (10) held on Friday and Saturday 26-27 Safar 1425
A.H., corrsponding  to 16-17 April 2004A.D., in the Kingdom Of Bahrain, the Shari'ah Standards Committee  (2) discussed the Shari'ah study and advised the consultant to make necessary changes in light ofthe discussions and observations of its members.

In its  meeting No.  (11) held on Wednesday  28 Rabi' II,  1425 A.H., corrsponding to 16 June 2004 A.D., in Dubai (U.A.E), the Sharf'ah Standards Committee  (2)  discussed the draft Standard on Agency and the Act of Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli) and introduced some changes thereto in light of the discussions and observations ofthe members.

Once again, the committee discussed the draft standard in its meeting held on 24-25 Rajah 1425 A.H., corresponding to 9-10 September 2004
A.D., and made further changes in light ofthe discussions and observations of its members.

The revised draft of the standard  was then submitted  to the Shari'ah
Board in its meeting No. (13) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 26-30



622





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

Sha'ban 1425 A.H., corresponding to 10-14 October 2004 A.D. The Board made some changes in the document  and decided to send the amended document to a number of experts for their comments before discussing it in a public hearing.

A public hearing was held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 15 Safar 1426
A.H., cooresponding to 25 March 2005 A.D., and attended by more than 35 participants representing central banks, financial Institutions, accounting firms, Sharf'ah scholars, academics and other concerned parties. Several comments were made before and after the public hearing. Some members of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) responded to the quires made during the session.

In the meeting of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2), held in the Kingdom ofBahrain on 15-16 Safar 1426 A.H., corresponding to 25•
26 March 2005 A.D., the comments made during the public hearing were discussed and some changes were made to the document.

The Shari'ah Board convened its meeting No. (14) on 21-23 Rabi' I, 1426
A.H., corresponding to 30 April- 2 May 2005 A.D., held in Dubai (U.A.E)
and adopted the Standard



























623





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


• Permissibility of agency by Sharf'ah is demonstrated in the noble Qur'an, where Allah, Exalted be He, says: {"..So send one ofyou with this silver coin ofyours to the town, and let himfind out which is the good lawful food.."}. Similitude of this incidence to agency is that the one who was sent to the town to buy the food was the agent ofthe others.In Sunnah,
a Hadith was narrated  by Urwah Al-Bariqi (may Allah be pleased with
him) who said that the Prophet (peace be upon him) had given him one dinar to purchase a sacrificial sheep for the Prophet, an incidence that involves agency. As regards to ljma' (consensus of Fuqaha), the author of
the "AL-Bahr Al-Zakhkhar" and others have demonstrated permissibility of agency. Also, in common sense agency is well demonstrated in terms of the help of others that one may sometimes need, especially for things that he cannot do himself.6
• Permissibility of initiating agency in any wording which indicates initiation thereof is based on the fiqh principle that "What matters in contracts are intentions and meanings rather than wording and constructions': Therefore, whatever indicates delegation, which is the essence of agency, is acceptable for initiating the  contract. The underlying reason for consideration of silence as acceptance in case of non-paid agency is that acceptance in this case is considered to have been given implicitly. Effectiveness ofthe agency contract can be linked to fulfillment of a certain condition or to a future date because agency is delegation of power rather than an act of ownership

(2) [Al-Kahf (The Cave): 19].
(3) Related by Al-Bukhari, Abu Dawud and AI-Tirmidhi:  "AI-Talkhis Al-Habir" [3: 304]. (4) "Nay! Al-Awtar" [5: 352]; "Fath Al-Qadir" by Ibn Al-Humam [6:  554]; "AL-Mughni" by
Ibn Qudamah  [5: 203]; and "AL-Bahr AI-Zakhkhar".
(5) "AI-Bahr AL-Ra 'iq" by Ibn Nujaym [7: 153].
(6) "AI-Minhaj" by AI-Nawawi [2:  164]; and "Fath AL-Qadir" [6: 553].



624





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

transfer that could be required immediately. On the contrary, a person may need to tie delegation to the occurrence ofa certain incidence, or to a specific date in the future.
■  The principal  shall possess the right of disposing of the asset in question

because the agent is going to derive such right from him; hence the former cannot delegate a right that he does not own.
■  As for the detailed rulings pertaining to partial legal capacity ofthe agent, these rulings hold true for all dealings including  agency.
■  The ruling that agency should be known  to the agent is manifested in the fact that knowledge  in this case is a necessity for completion of the pro• cess of offer and acceptance,  and hence distinction between  a real agent and an uncommissioned agent.
• Imposition  of four conditions  on the subject matter of agency is necessary
to facilitate conclusion and validity of the contract that cannot be attained without  these  four  conditions  namely:  existence   of the  asset,  asset ownership  by the principal, possibility  of disposing  of the asset through agency and the absence of any Shari'ah restriction that prevents the deal.
• Permissibility  of paid agency stems from the fact that  agency is a useful work for which the agent has the right to ask remuneration. An agent who is known to be providing agency services only against payment is entitled to remuneration even when remuneration is not explicitly mentioned in the contract, because a customary practice is acceptable as long as it does not encounter a Shari'ah restriction. Non-paid agency is also permissible because it is considered, in this case, as a form of donation.
■  The justification for the clauses relating to remuneration ofthe agent is that such clauses are essential to make remuneration well known at either the time of the contract  conclusion or in the future.  Temporary  uncertainty about the exact amount  of the remuneration is overlooked because knowledge of the amount in the future will leave no room for dispute."" Permissibility of adding a certain share of the profit to the principal  remuneration rests on the fact that such addition  does not distort knowledge of the principal

(7) "AL-Lubab" by Al-Maydani [2: 139].
(8) "AL-Insaf [5: 403]; "AL-Rawdah" by AI-Nawawi  [4: 301]; "AL-Khurashr" [7: 5]; "AL-Fatawa
AL-Hamidiyyah" [1: 324] and "Tadhkirat Al-Fuqaha"" by AI-Hilli [2: 114].



625





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

amount. In this case, the commitment to offer the agent a certain share of the profit is in the sense of a pledge to offer donation. Thus, the offered share of the profit can be considered as a conditional gift, or as Ju'alah. There is another viewpoint that considers the pledged share ofthe profit as a subsidiary addition to the principal remuneration,  and concludes that in a subsidiary we can overlook what we cannot overlook in the principal.
• Agency is, originally, non-binding because it is an act of delegation that neither the principal nor the agent should be forced to continue. The exceptional cases of binding  agency have been  dealt with to preserve whatever rights  of others  involved therein. Moreover,  an exceptional treatment is also needed for paid agency that should be subjected to the rulings on Ijarah, as well as the case when there is a pledge not to revoke the contract within a specific period because breaching such commit• ment may cause injury to others.
■  It is permissible to specify a time limit for agency, because agency is nothing but a contract that could have a specific duration, like Ijarah for instance. The justification for defining the commitments of the principal and the
agent is - as set out in the Standard- the need to honor contractual obli•
gations of agency and pursue the acts and liabilities that emerge from it.
■  The agent is considered as a trustee in holding the asset because he works for the interest of others (the principal)  and trusteeship  is the normal status in similar engagements. Moreover, the principal's act of choosing the agent for the purpose in question is an indication of his good faith on him, and therefore the principal should not reverse that good faith, except for misconduct, negligence or breach of the contract's limitations.
• Impermissibility ofcombining agency and guarantee in the same contract, is based  on their  opposing  implications,  in addition  to the  fact that guarantee by the agent entails a suspicion of Riba (usury). Therefore, the status of the agent as a trustee contradicts with provision of guarantee.
• Impermissibility for the agent to represent both parties to the contract -•
as per the Hanafi School and the predominant view in the Shafi'i School
- is to avoid assigning both offer and acceptance to the same party,  and hence prevent any probable self bias. Adopting the viewpoint of these two Schools is, therefore, most suitable for Institutions to avoid malpractices and



626





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

misleading formalism in making transactions and prevent overlapping of guarantees.
• Monitoring of the contract's provisions is assigned to the principal because he is the principal party  of the contract,  whereas  the agent, who is just a contractor, has to monitor  the activities of the contract.
■  Suspension of an agent act that breach the contract without adding to the benefit of the principal, until obtaining the principal's approval conforms to the normal Sharf'ah practice of exerting the best possible effort to rectify an act of a Muslim."The act here remains pending approval of the princi• pal to safeguard him against injury.
■  An agent who breaches the contract by selling or buying at a price other than  the price agreed upon has to indemnify  the principal  for the diffe• rence between  the price he accepted/offered, and the market price. The justification for this ruling is the need to establish justice and compensate the principal for loss, without  committing the Shari'ah-banned practice of accepting capital on pre-fixed return, which entails a suspicion ofRiba. This case has been discussed in "Al-Mughni" by Ibn Qudamah, who refer• red also to another viewpoint that suggests revocation of the deal.
• Agency in selling a mortgaged asset is treated as an exceptional case where the contract does not expire on the death ofthe agent (agency to be pursued by inheritors), in order to preserve the rights of the mortgagee. Moreover, such agency is originally irrevocable before fulfillm ent of its purpose, for thereto is attached others' rights.
■  The justification  for adopting  the fiqh viewpoint that  advocates suspen• ding the act of the uncommissioned agent rather than  revoking the deal (for uncertainty about its confirmation  by the principal), is the fact that an act ofa Muslim should, as far as possible, be preserved from cancellation. Preservation  of the act against cancellation is possible here through  sus• pension, in addition to the fact that the act may prove to be useful to the

(9) "A1-Mughni" by Ibn Qudamah  [5: 135-136].
(10) Ibid.
(11) In "Al-Bada'r" [5:  177)], it is stated: "The act of the Muslim should, as far as possible, be perceived as correct; and in "Fath AI-Qadir" [2: 445], it is stated: "Making the best possible effort to rectify the act of the Muslim.



627





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommis sioned Agent (Fodooli)

owner of the property in question. In this connection, Ibn AI-Humam said: "When the case is viewed from the standpoint of Gharar (uncer• tainty),  the contract appears to be invalid, whereas if it is viewed from the standpoint  of benefit and absence of harm the contract appears to be permissible.  Therefore, Ibnul Humam supports reconciliation of the two standpoints by suggesting permissibility with suspension     It has also been narrated that the Prophet (peace be upon him) said:  "Whoever can offer a benefit to his Muslim  brother, should  do so". If, however, the act turned to be harmful to the principal, he can revoke it by virtue of the right he has.
Moreover, permissibility of suspending the act of the uncommissioned agent until approval of the principal can also be derived from the Hadith narrated by Hakim Ibn Hizam (May Allah be pleased with him) stating that the Prophet (peace be upon him) gave him one dinar so as to buy a sheep that the Prophet (peace be upon him) wanted to sacrifice. Hakim purchased the sheep for one dinar and sold it for two. Then he purchased another sheep for the Prophet (peace be upon him) for one dinar and handed over the remaining dinar to him. The Prophet (peace be upon him) took the remaining dinar and spent it on charity and then prayed to Allah to bless Hakim's trading business.(




















(12)  "Fath A1-Qadir" [5: 317].
(13) Related by Abu Dawud and AI-Tirmidhi.



628
























