Shari'ah Standard No. (35)




Zakah












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                             869
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................        870

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               870
2. Procedural Rulings...................................................................................        870
3. General Rulings........................................................................................       872
4. Fixed Assets...............................................................................................        874
5. Zakatable Assets........................................................................................       876
6. Liabilities....................................................................................................       888
7. Provisions..................................................................................................       891
8. Reserves                                                                                                   894
9. Eight Heads of Zakah Disbursement....................................................         896
10. Rulings Relating to Zakah Disbursement..............................................       896
11. Nisab and Zakah Rate for Livestock (An'am)                                             898
12. Date of Issuance of the Standard.............................................................       899
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        900
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard...............       901
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard....................................        903
Appendix (c):  Definitions..............................................................................        904














867








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This standard  aims to identify the  Zakah base for Islamic financial Institutions  (Institution/Institutions)," and indicate the different types of zakatable assets and the liabilities (debts ofthe Institution)  and allocations that have to be deducted from them. The standard also aims to illustrate the payable Zak.ah rates, and indicate the specific heads ofZakahdisbursements.






























(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



869





Shari'ah Standard No. (35): Zakah





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard  covers identification  of the Zakah base for Institutions (including Islamic insurance companies) as well as the subsidiary and the mother company ofthe Institution (the company). This will be done through identification ofthe items of financial statements that should or should not be included in calculation ofthe Zakah base, and the liabilities or allocations that should or should not be deducted from Zakatable assets. The standard also covers payable Zakah rates, disbursement  of Zakah funds on the eight categories of Zakah recipients, and the rulings pertaining to disbursement.

2. Procedural Rulings

2/1  Methods of calculation of Zakah base

There are two methods for calculation of Zakah base: the first is the method ofnet assets, and the second is the method ofnet investment assets. The two methods have different bases of assessment, yet if such difference is well recognized the final outcome will be the same. This standard is based on the net assets method.

Net Assets Method

2/1/1  Calculation of Zakah base by using the net assets method is done as follows:
Zakah base = Zakatable assets - (liabilities payable during the financialyear as at the date ofthe balance sheet+ all installments ofliabilities ofthe financial year which will become due during the coming financial period  + rights of the holders of non• restricted investment accounts + minority rights +sovereign rights +waqf rights+ charitable rights+ rights of non-profit• earning organizations that have no specific owner).



870





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

Zakatable assets include: cash and the like, receivables (mi• nus)  doubtful  debts,  assets prepared  for trading  (such  as goods, financial papers and real estate), and financing assets (Mudarabah,  Musharakah,  Salam, Istisna'a .....).  Deductions from financial assets include fixed assets relating to them as well as deductible allocations as shown in item 7.

2/1/2 Assets prepared for trade are to be assessed in terms of their expected cash value (selling market value) at the time when Zakah is due.

2/ 1/3  In determination ofzakatable assets in agriculture and livestock other than articles of trade, application of the ratios and rates specified by Shari'ah should be observed.

2/2 Direct payment of Zakah by the institution

2/2/1 The institution  or the company is committed  to pay Zakah under the following cases:
a) Enactment of an enforceable Zakah law.

b) Stipulation of commitment to pay Zakah in the articles of association.
c) Issuance of a Zakah commitment resolution by the general assembly.

2/2/2 When the Institution  accepts agency for payment  of Zakah on behalf of all or some of its equity holders or the holders of investment accounts, funds should be available - or submitted by the principals of such agency - for payment  of Zakah on their behalf.

2/2/3 There should be coordination between the mother Company and its subsidiaries with regard to payment of Zakah so as to avoid double payment.

2/2/4 In case of establishing a Zakah fund, or preparing Zakah ac• counts, clearance by the Shari'ah Board of the institution  or the company should be obtained.  Clearance by the Shari'ah



871





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

Board is particularly required for disbursement of the Zak.ah funds, when performed  directly by the institution/company, or through  an accredited Zak.ah agency. Moreover, a compre• hensive report on Zak.ah disbursements  should be presented to the Sharf'ah Board on annual basis.

2/2/5 In the absence of any ofthe conditions indicated in item (2/2/1) above, payment  of Zak.ah shall become the responsibility of shareholders and holders of the investment accounts. In this case the Institution or the companyhas to indicate the amount of Zakah payable per share or per a given balance ofan investment account.

2/3  Zakah-related financial statements

2/3/1 The Balance sheet

Due to the fact that Zak.ah relates to ownership  of zakatable assets, what matters  to the Institutions in Zak.ah calculation is the  financial  data  included  in  the  balance  sheet  of the institution  (the budget), which  comprises  assets, liabilities, and their related allocations.

2/3/2 Income statement

Income  statement  (profit  and loss account)  does not  form a basis for Zak.ah calculation, yet it is referred to for knowing the income or profit of the income-earning fixed assets. In order to pay Zak.ah the Institution  should not necessarily be making profits. Incurring  losses by the Institution  does not prevent  Zak.ah from  becoming  due. The  Institution  is still committed  to pay Zak.ah, except when its liabilities (debtors) absorb all its assets.

3. General Rulings

3/1  Shari'ah definition  of Zak.ah,  status (Hulan)  of Zak.ah in Shari'ah, and Zakatable funds



872





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

3/1/1  Zak.ah is a right which becomes due in certain types ofwealth, and disbursable  to specific categories of recipients. It is an in rem duty when its conditions  are satisfied.

3/1/2 Zak.ah is obligatory  on gold, silver, currencies,  trade articles, livestock (camels, cows and goats), agricultural produce, min• erals and Rikaz (treasures).

3/1/3 Zak.ah is not  obligatory  on wages, salaries and  income  from free occupations  at the time of receiving such income; whereas it is obligatory on that portion of such income which remains unexpended for a whole year.

3/1/4 Zak.ah is not obligatory on fixed assets which generate income and  which  are not  acquired  for trade, such  as leased  assets. Nevertheless, at the end of the year, Zak.ah is obligatory on the remaining portion  of the income generated by these assets.

3/1/5 Zak.ah is not obligatory on public wealth (public sector) or the insurance  funds of public institutions.

3/1/6 Zak.ah is not  obligatory  on the  charitable  Waqf (al-Waqf al• Khayri). As  regards  the  family  Waqf  (al-Waqf al-Ahli)  the beneficiaries  should  pay Zak.ah,  at the  end  of the year,  from that portion of the Waqf income which remains unexpended.

3/1/7 The  above  ruling  which  relates  to  exemption   of charitable Waqf from Zakah is also applicable to trust funds as well Irsad (allocation) of public funds and properties for (non-profiteering) educational, charitable, and social Institutions, which have no specific owner, even if such institutions make profits.
3/2 Conditions for Zakah obligation

3/2/1  Full ownership

Full ownership materializes when nobody else has a right in the asset in question, the owner can dispose of the asset the way he likes, and the owner of the asset is the sole owner of the income generated  from the asset. In this case, no matter  if the asset is



873





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

allocated for any specific purpose other than settlement ofdebts (for instance, no matter if it is allocated for implementation of investment projects).

3/2/2 Nisab (Zakatable wealth stratum)

The Nisab for gold regardless of its form is 85 grams of pure gold or its equivalent in currency (paper or coins), and the same Nisab is also applicable to articles oftrade after valuation, as well as to extracted minerals. For silver, the Nisab is 595 grams of pure silver. The Nisab which is widely recognized as applicable to articles of trade is that of gold. Nisab for Zakah on livestock is shown at the end ofthis standard.

3/2/4 AI-Hawl (Zakah year)

The Zakah year for cash and commercial  assets as well as livestock is a lunar year (354 days). In case ofadopting the solar year for cash and commercial assets, the Zakah rate becomes
2.577%. As regards agricultural products no consideration is
to be given to the Hawl (Zakah year) because what matters is harvesting. Similarly what should be considered for minerals and Rikaz (treasures) is their extraction.

3/3  Applicable Zakah rate

The rate ofZakah applicable to gold, silver, currencies and articles of trade is 2.5%- with due consideration to item 3/2/3 above -,whereas the rate applicable to agricultural produce  is one tenth  (10%) for the produce of non-irrigated  lands, half of the tenth  (5%) for the produce of irrigated lands,  and three quarters of the tenth  (7.5%) for the produce ofpartially irrigated lands. Zakah rates applicable to livestock are shown at the end ofthis standard.

4. Fixed Assets

4/1  Operational fixed assets

Zakah is not obligatory on operational fixed assets such as the prem•
ises ofthe institution and its equipments; or on intangible assets such

(2) 1n a leap year the rate is 2.5775



874





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

as patent rights,  trademarks  and computer software.  Zakah is also not obligatory on moveable assets acquired for operation (other than those prepared for trade) such as spare parts and tools used for fur• ther production, even when such assets are kept in the warehouses.

4/2 Income-generating  fixed assets

There  is no  Zakah  on  fixed assets which  generate  income  like Mustghallat (leased assets), if such assets are not acquired for trade. Nevertheless,  Zakah is obligatory,  at the end of the year,  on the unexpended  portion  of the income  generated  by such assets, by adding that  portion  of income to the other  zakatable assets and applying the Zakah rate.

Income-earning fixed assets appear in the financial statements under the following items:

4/2/1 Mustaghallat  (leased assets such  as real estate properties, transportation vehicles..etc.).  At  the  end  of the  year,  the unexpended rental of these assets is to be subjected to Zakah by adding it to other zakatable assets.

4/2/2 Real estate investments: At the end ofthe year, the unexpended income of these assets is to be subjected to Zakah by adding it to other zakatable assets.

4/2/3 Capital projects  under  implementation (which are not  for trading)

If a project of this type happens to generate income at some of its stages of implementation, Zakah is obligatory on the unex• pended part ofthat income, after adding it to zakatable assets at the end of the year. If such projects are being implemented for trading purposes. [see item (5/2/6/3)]
4/2/4 Investments in shares with the aim ofretaining them (Nama')

If it is possible to know through the company what is the exact amount ofZakatable assets (cash, articles oftrade and repayable debts) per share, Zakah can be levied on that amount, otherwise Zakah is to be levied on the portion ofzakatable assets per share,



875





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

which has to be reached through estimation. Ifthe company has no zakatable assets, Zak.ah is obligatory on the remaining part ofthe net income at the end ofthe year.

As far as shares owned for non-trading purposes are concerned, no allocation for deterioration in the value of share investments should be made from the zakatable assets. Regarding shares acquired for trading purposes, the ruling on articles of trade (item 5/2) should be applied.

4/2/5 Investment in the shares of subsidiaries

In, accounting, a subsidiary is the entity in which the mother company  owns  50% of the  shares.  The  process  of Zak.ah payment in this case starts with calculating the Zak.ah of the subsidiary independently, and then the mother company pays its share of Zak.ah in proportion  to its shareholding  in the subsidiary. The remaining part of the Zak.ah of the subsidiary is to be  paid  by the  other  parties  (minority rights).  Such arrangement holds true when the subsidiary does not pay its Zakah directly.

5. Zakatable Assets

5/1  Liquid or easy-to-liquidate current assets

Such  assets  which  include  cash  assets  and  assets  which  can be converted  into cash (quasi cash), are shown in the financial statements  under the following items:

5/1/1  Cash in hand: Zak.ah has to be paid from these funds. If such funds are in foreign currency Zak.ah should be paid from the equivalent  amount  in local currency  as per  the  prevailing exchange rate on the date when Zak.ah is due.

5/1/2 Gold and silver assets in any form: Zak.ah on such assets is to be assessed on the basis of their net weight or cash value.

(3) From a Shari'ah point ofview, the same ruling is applicable when the mother institution owns less than 50% ofthe shares ofthe subsidiary.



876





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

5/1/3 Bank balances: banlc balances constitute the following items in the financial statements:

5/1/3/1 Current accounts

Institutions  and companies should pay Zakah from their  current  accounts  with  other  Institutions, be• cause such accounts constitute debts that will certainly be settled. Current  accounts include those with the central bank as well as those with other banks. When the Institution obtains interest in such accounts (though it is prohibited) it should pay Zakah from the principal amounts  and donate the whole amount of the interest for charitable purposes. For the banks or the Institutions  which receive such deposits current accounts constitute liabilities.  [see item 6/3/1]

5/1/3/2 Investment accounts

a) The owners of these accounts should pay Zakah from the investment balances as well as the profits, whether such accounts represent short or long term deposits, and even if drawing from the account is restricted by the investment Institution or the owner. If these accounts are invested through per• missible modes, what really matters is their share in the investment assets, rather than their share in the invested amounts. Consequently due consideration has to be given to the nature of the assets represen• ting the invested amounts.

As for the institutions in which the accounts are invested,  an account of this type represents a trust (Amanah) rather than a liability, and therefore these Institutions should pay Zakah only on their share of the profits or their commissions, as part oftheir cash assets.



877





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

b) When the investment accounts earn interests (though prohibited) Zakah is payable from the principal, while the entire amount of interest should be donated for charitable purposes. As for the banks in which these interest bearing accounts are deposited, the principal amounts  (excluding  interest)  represent liabilities. [see item 6/3/2]

5/1/4 Bonds, Sukuk and funds

5/1/4/1 Bonds and treasury bills (which represent debts and involve  interest  - though  prohibited):  Zakah  from the principal of the bond  (cost  of the bond)  should be paid, whereas the entire amount of interest should be donated  for charitable purposes. As  regards the issuing banks, the nominal value of these bonds and bills represent a liability.  [see item 6/3/2]

5/1/4/2 Investment  Sukuk  of different  types:  Their  owners should pay Zakah on the basis ofthe underlying assets of these Sukuk, and as indicated in this Standard. As for the Institutions which manage the assets or keep the  investment  Sukuk, the  Sukuk represent  a trust (Amanah) rather than a liability, and therefore these Institutions should pay Zakah only on their share of the profits or their commissions, as part of their cash assets.

5/1/4/3 Investment Funds in their different forms: Zakah has to be paid on the basis of the underlying assets of the fund, and as indicated in this Standard.

5/1/5 Amounts retained for documentation ofthe deal

5/1/5/1 Hamish Jiddiyyah  (security  deposit):  This  refers to the advance amount which the client pays in order to confirm his binding pledge. Such amount is supposed to cover any harm  caused by recoiling of the client from completion of the deal:  Zakah on such amount



878





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

shall be paid by the client. If the amount is deposited in a current  account it shall become subject to the rulings shown in item 5/7/3/1  and if it is deposited in an investment account it shall become subject to the rulings indicated in item. [5/1/3/2]

5/1/5/2 The initial security for entering bids as well as imple• mentation security: are to be ducted from the zakatable assets ofthe Institution which receives them, while the owner of such amount has to pay Zakah it annually as part of his assets, unless he has not been enabled to invest it before refund. When several years elapse be• fore refund, Zakah for one year has to be paid. If such amounts  are deposited  in an investment  account it shall become subject to the rulings stipulated in item. [5/1/3/2]

5/1/5/3 Cash security charged to individuals and Institutions for obtaining certain services such as telephone and electricity services, or security paid on renting shops and equipments: Zakah should be paid by the owner of such amount on refund, and for one year, unless he has been enabled to invest the amount before refund. If the owner of the amount has been enabled to invest it before refund Zakah has to be paid subject to the rulings stated in item. [5/1/5/2]

5/1/5/4 'Arboun (Earnest Money): To be deducted from the zakatable assets of the buyer, while the seller should pay Zakah from it as part ofhis Zakatable assets, since he will get the amount if the contract is concluded or not.

5/2  Commodity current assets (Articles of Trade)

5/2/1 Articles of trade include anything offered for sale such as real estate and moveable assets, whether the good is being sold in



879





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

its current state or after manufacturing, and when it is acquired through buying or otherwise. To be subject to Zakah payment such goods should not necessarily be obtained through buying, the mere intention to offer them for sale is quite sufficient.

5/2/2 Articles oftrade should be valued at selling market price in the place where theyexist, and according to the method oftheir sale (retail, or wholesale, or if both whichever the predominant). Articles of trade should not be valued at cost or market price whichever the less. However, when other methods ofvaluation are extremely difficult, valuation at cost can be used for Zakah purposes. When  there  is a price change during  the period between the date ofaccrual and date ofpayment of Zakah, the price at the date of Zakah accrual should be adopted.

5/2/3 When the articles oftrade are subject to another type ofZakah treatment  (e.g., when  the  articles of trade  are livestock  or agricultural  produce)  they should become subject to Zakah on articles of trade only.

5/2/4 In principle, Zakah on articles oftrade is to be paid in cash, yet in case oftrade recession it can be paid in kind (from the same articles oftrade), provided that the interest ofZakah recipients could, thus, be achieved.

5/2/5 Zakah has to be paid on the goods earmarked  for the buyer after concluding the contract, even if he has not yet possessed them.

5/2/6 Applications relating to commodity current assets in the items of financial statements

5/2/6/1 Commodity stocks prepared for Trade, raw materials in their  different  forms, and goods for sale in their original form or after being manufactured by adding them to other materials: To be valued for Zakah pur• poses at selling market price.



880





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

If a good of this type is defective it shall be valued at its selling market  price  and as per the method  of its sale (retail, or wholesale, or ifboth whichever the pre• dominant).  If the good in question  is a slow-moving item it can be valued for Zakah at its market price and in its current  form. When  an allocation  is made  for such goods it should not be deducted  from  zakatable assets.

5/2/6/2 Goods  in  process:  To be  valued  for  Zakah  at  their current  market price on the day of Zakah accrual, and if it is not possible to know  their  market  value, they could be valued at cost.

5/2/6/3 Works under  implementation (constructions): To be valued  for Zakah  in their  current state on the day of Zakah accrual.

5/2/6/4 Industrial  accessories (spare parts) used in production equipment: are not part of Zakatable assets.

5/2/6/5 Goods in transit: To be valued for Zakah at market price in the place where they are found

5/2/6/6 Goods to be sold by others on commission (by agency): To be valued for Zakah  at market  price  in the  place where they are found.

5/2/6/7 Goods imported through documentary credits covered by the Institution,  including  the expenses of opening the credit and the amounts  retained  by intermediary banks: Zakah should be paid on the amounts  retained for the credit,  and not the expenses. When  the goods are owned  Zakah  has  to be paid  from  them  on  the basis of their market value.

5/2/6/8 Goods prepared for export through documentary  cred•
its to the benefit ofthe Institution: The amounts retained



881





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

for the credit, are neither subject to Zakah nor are they deductable from zakatable assets, since they have not yet been possessed. However, Zakah has to be paid on the goods that are still held by the Institution as part of its finished goods or goods in process.

5/2/7 Intangible rights prepared for trade such as copy right, patent right, trademarks,  and computer  software: should be subject to Zakah on articles of trade.

5/2/8 End of the year stock of raw materials  (primary  materials) which are normally used as ingredients and remain as compo• nents of the goods manufactured for trade: Should be valued for Zakah at their market value before entering the process of manufacturing. No Zakah is payable on supporting materials which do not represent  ingredients  of or remain as compo• nents of the manufactured goods, such as fuel and cleaning materials.

5/2/9 Finished goods and goods in process being manufactured  for trade: are subject to the same rate applicable to Zakah on articles of trade. Finished goods and goods in process should be valued in their current state and at market price.

5/2/10 Rapping  and  packing  materials:  are not  to be included  in valuation ofgoods for Zakah ifsuch materials are not prepared for trade  separately.  Nevertheless,  if such materials increase the value ofthe goods they should be included.

5/3  Receivables of the institution or the company

5/3/1  If the debt owed to the Institution is a cash amount the Institu• tion should pay Zakah on it annually - whether such debt is due or not - since the Institution will certainly receive it. As for bad debts (non-repayable debts) and doubtful debts the Institution does not have to pay Zakah except for one year after collection of such debts, and as per the rulings indicated in item 6/2.



882





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

5/3/2 The institution can postpone Zak.ah on its outstanding debts until full or partial collection. On collection, the Institution has to pay Zak.ah for the whole past period. When  a specific debt is partially  doubtful, and  an allocation  is made  for doubtful debts, the  doubtful  part  of the  debt  can  be  deducted  from Zakatable assets, if the total amount  of such debt has initially been included  in the these assets.

5/3/3 When  the debt owed to the institution by another  party  com• prises interest that has arisen from the process oflending and borrowing or from  rescheduling  of the  debt; the  Institution should pay Zak.ah on the principal only and donate the whole amount  of interest  for charitable  purposes.  It should, howev• er, be noted that interest bearing  deposits and loans as well as discounting of receipt papers  are strictly prohibited  dealings which should be avoided.

5/3/4 Applications relating  to Receivables in the items of financial statements

5/3/4/1 Debtors: Zak.ah shall be paid on the amounts payable to the Institution  against goods or services sold on debt. In this respect, due consideration should be given to the above-mentioned items.

5/3/4/2 Loans, overdraft  accounts,  and debt  bonds  including discounted  bonds (zero coupon) and accepted bills (discounted  bills): Zakah  is payable on the value paid for purchasing  the  bond,  whereas  interest - though prohibited -  should  become  subject  to  the  rulings indicated  in item 5/3/4.

5/3/4/3 Receipt  papers  (bills  and  promissory   notes):  Zak.ah shall be paid on the principal ofthe debt (amount ofthe paper),  including  the increment  added to the price,  if the paper relates to a commodity sold on debt. It shall be noted here that the case will remain the same whether



883





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

the debt represented by the paper is due or not, since no difficulty is going to be encountered in its collection. If the paper comprises interest the rulings indicted in item 5/3/4 regarding interest should be observed.

5/3/4/4Arnounts retained  from  contracts:  Such guarantee amounts  are held by the clients to ensure  that  the Institution is going to honor its commitments. If the Institution  has not been enabled to invest these re• tention  amounts  it should not pay Zakah on them. However, on receipt of the amounts  the Institution has to pay Zakah on them for only one year.

5/3/4/5Advance payments  on signing contracts: No Zakah shall be paid on them, since they are no longer owned by the Institution.

5/3/4/6 Prepaid expenses: No Zakah is payable on such amounts which represent expenses of forthcoming financial pe• riods, since they are no longer owned by the Institution.

5/3/4/7 Accrued income:  It represents income of the current period which has not yet been received, and it shall be subject to Zakah on debts as indicated in item 5/3/1.

5/3/4/8 Legal deposit: It refers to the amount retained by a bank on request of the concerned authorities for the sake of awarding license to the Institution. The Institution cannot withdraw or dispose of such amount  except on  permission  of the  concerned  authorities.  If the institution has not been enabled to invest the retained amount it shall pay Zakah on it for only one year at the time of refund.  If such deposit involves interest (though prohibited) the rulings indicated in item 5/3/4 should be applied.

5/3/4/9 Murabahah debtors: It indicates the amounts owed by purchasers. Zakah in this case is payable on total price including profits, as indicated in item 5/3/1.



884





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

5/3/4/10 Debtors of Salam goods purchased by the Institution and not yet received: the Institution should pay Zak.ah on Salam capital if the goods have been purchased for trading purposes. When the goods are purchased for operating or income generating purposes the rulings indicated in item 4/1 and 4/2 should be applied. As regards the Salam capital received by the seller of the goods, such income is subject to Zak.ah as part of the seller's cash assets.

5/3/4/11 Debtors of Istisna'a goods sold by the institution: This item represents the balance ofamounts due to the Insti• tution as per delivery dates of the Istisna'a commodity. Such amounts are part of Zakatable assets, and Zakah has to be paid on them under the category of current assets, because they constitute cash amounts.

5/3/4/12 Debtors of Istisna'a goods purchased by the institution: When such goods are purchased for the sake oftrading, the debt relating to them (the price which the Institution is committed to pay to the seller) should be included in zakatable assets, and subjected to Zakah as per item
5/3/1.

5/3/4/13 Investment in shares for the sake of trading:  Should become subject to the Zakah rate applicable to articles for trade. Valuation has to be at market price, yet in the absence of any market for such shares, valuation can be made by experts.

5/3/5 Debtors in an insurance portfolio

As indicated in the Sharf'ah standard on Islamic Insurance the contributions of policyholders constitute a fund which has an independent financial liability, and the contributor is supposed to have given the premium as a donation. Consequently, the in• surance fund is not committed to pay back any excess amounts to policyholders [items 2 and 5/5 of the Shari'ah Standard No.



885





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

(26) on Islamic Insurance]. In view ofthis no Zak.ah is payable by the insurance portfolio.

5/4 Zakah on agricultural produce and fruits

5/4/1 The Nisab for agricultural produce and fruits is 653 kilograms.
No consideration should be given to the Hawl (Zak.ah year) because what matters here is harvesting. The applicable Zakah rate is one tenth (10%) for the produce ofnon-irrigated lands, half of the tenth (5%) for the produce of irrigated lands, and three quarters of the tenth (7.5%) for the produce of partially irrigated lands.

5/4/2 In calculation of the Nisab  different types of the same kind of produce can be added together, such as the different types of the same kind of grain or fruit, whereas different kinds of produce or fruits cannot be added together. Each kind of produce or fruit should have its separate Nisab.  It makes no difference when the agricultural produce or fruits owned by the same Institution or company are in different geographical locations.

5/4/3 Khars (estimation by experts) can be adopted when the agri• cultural products  or fruits are ripe. One fourth or one third can be deducted and left to the owner and the rest becomes subject to Zakah on the basis of Khars after the produce  is dried. Zakah can also be paid in terms ofvalue.

5/4/4 Works under implementation (constructions) relating to agri•
culture are not part of Zakatable assets.

5/4/5 Production requirements such as fertilizers and insecticides are not part of zakatable assets, and should not be deducted from the Zakah base unless they have been obtained through debt.

5/4/6 Rapping and packing materials are not part ofzakatable assets.

5/4/7 Expenses relating to irrigation, land development, irrigation channels and soil woks shall not be deducted from zakatable assets.



886





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

5/4/8 Cost of delivery to recipients shall be deducted from zakatable assets.
5/4/9 Zakah on the produce of a rented agricultural land should be paid by the tenant. In case of Muzara'ah or Musaqat, Zakah shall be paid by the two parties proportionately.

5/4/10 Subsidies and concessions related to agriculture: Cash subsi• dies shall be included in the Zakah base as part ofliquid assets subject to item 5/3/1, whereas free-of-charge land and equip• ment should not.

5/5  Zakah on minerals

5/5/1 Minerals here include all stuffs ofthis kind extracted from the earth or the sea whether in liquid, solid or gaseous form.

5/5/2 The Nisab for minerals is what has reached in value 85 kilograms of gold. Nisab is to be assessed for quantities extracted continuously. If extraction is suspended for an abnormal period assessment of Nisab shall start at the time when extraction is resumed again. The Zakah rate applicable to minerals is 2.5%. If the extracted minerals are owned by the state no Zakah shall be paid on them, otherwise minerals are the property of their extractor, and he should pay Zakah on them.  [see Shari'ah Standard No. (22) on Concession Contracts]

5/5/3 Pearl, coral and fish extracted from the sea for trade should become subject to the Zakah rate applicable to articles oftrade.

5/6 Zakah on livestock

Nisabs and Zakah rates for livestock (camels, cows and goats) are shown at the end ofthis standard. Livestock that reaches the Nisab is subject to Zakah, whether owned for milk or progeny. The animals shall become subject to the Zakah rate on livestock, only if they are fed through free grazing, most of the year. If the animals are owned for trade they shall become subject to the Zakah rate on articles of trade.



887





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

5/6/1 It makes no difference ifthe animals which belong to the same owner are found in the same place or different places. Mixed ownership can also be recognized so that the animals owned by more than one person are treated as if they are owned by a single person, when such animals share the same facilities.

5/6/2 Animals owned for trade should become subject to the Zak.ah rate on articles of trade. Valuation has to be at selling market price.

5/6/3 Working animals, such as animals used in land plowing, irri•
gation and carrying are not part of zakatable assets.

5/6/4 Animals other than camels, cows and goats are not subject to Zak.ah payment, unless they are owned for trade. If such animals are used for production rather than trade they should not be included in zakatable assets.

5/6/5 When animal products such as milk and wool are owned for trade they should become subject to Zak.ah on articles oftrade.

5/6/6 Zakah is not payable on horses, mules, donkeys and all other animals used for work or adornment, unless owned for trade.

5/6/7 Zak.ah is not obligatory on chickens acquired for production, which  should  be treated  in the  same way as Mustaghallat (productive assets such as leased properties).  [see item 4/2]

5/6/8 Chickens, milk and stocks of animals are subject to Zak.ah on articles of trade when they are owned for trade purposes.

6. Liabilities

6/1  Classification of liabilities

Liabilities in financial  statements  comprise  items which  are not debts owed by the Institution in the strict sense of Shari'ah. Such items include for instance the capital of the company, the reserves and the profits. The debts included  under  the  item of liabilities comprise the following:



888





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

6/1/1 Non-current  (long term) liabilities which refer to debts that become due after one year. Such debts usually arise from pur• chase of fixed assets on debt, in addition to other long term entitlements.

6/1/2 Current (short term) liabilities which refer to debts that become due within one year.

6/2  Debts owed by the institution

6/2/1  Ifthe debts owed by the Institution have arisen from obtaining current zakatable assets for the purpose of trade they should be deducted from the Zakah base.

6/2/2 Ifthe debts owed by the Institution have arisen from obtaining non-zakatable fixed assets, they should not be deducted from the Zakah base.

6/2/3 When it is difficult to know the amount of debt that has arisen from acquiring zakatable assets, the ratio ofzakatable assets to total assets should be used for assessment of such debt which has to be  deducted  from  the  Zakah base.  If, for instance, zakatable assets constitute 40% of total assets, 40% of total debts should be deducted from the Zakah base.

6/2/4 If the debt owed by the Institution has arisen from a Shari'ah• banned practice such as borrowing with interest, unpaid in• terests should not be deducted from zakatable assets, because impermissible commitments cannot lead to a Shari'ah-recogniz• able debt.

6/3  Applications relating to current liabilities in the items of financial statements
6/3/1  Current  accounts:  The balances of current  accounts should be deducted from the zakatable assets of the Institutions with which such accounts are deposited. Similarly, the principal as well as the profits of investment accounts should be deducted from the zakatable assets of the Institutions  entrusted  with



889





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

investing these accounts to the benefit of their  holders.  In the case of investment accounts the share of the Mudarib or agency fees earned by the Institution shall  be excluded from the deductable amount.

6/3/2 Creditors: This item refers to the amounts payable to the creditors of the institution during the Zakah year.  Such amounts which usually arise from obtaining goods, equipment, or services on debt should be deducted from zakatable assets.

6/3/3 Creditors of sold goods of Salam: It refers to those who pur• chased goods from the Institution  through  Salam and have not yet received them. The goods constitute a debt, because they have not yet been delivered, and therefore, the amount of Salam capital should be deducted from the zakatable assets.

6/3/4 Creditors ofsold goods oflstisna'a: The goods constitute a debt because the Institution has entered in a commitment to make them, and it is yet to do so.  Hence, such goods shall become subject to the rulings indicated in item 6/3/6.

6/3/5 Creditors of purchased goods of lstisna'a: This indicates the debt commitment of the Institution when it purchases goods through lstisna'a. The balance ofthis item should be deducted from Zakatable assets.

6/3/6 Payment papers: It includes bills and order bonds issued to importers  of deferred goods and services, or bills and order bonds issued for interest free borrowing;  if such papers will fall due in the next Zakah year. Such assets should be deducted from zakatable assets.

6/3/7 Short term loans and overdraft accounts shall be subject to the rulings indicated in item 6/3/2.

6/3/8 Accrued expenses: It is the expenses which relate to the current period and is to be paid during the next period. Such expenses should be deducted from zakatable assets.



890





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

6/3/9 Prepaid income: If such income relates to services which have not yet been provided no Zak.ah has to be paid on the exact portion of it which relates to the undelivered services; because such income is not finally owned, and the Ijarah (hiring) contract for provision ofthe services could be terminated on occurrence of an excuse or aforce majeure situation. Consequently prepaid income  for undelivered  services should  be deducted  from zakatable assets.

Nevertheless, cash amounts  of earnest money forwarded  on conclusion of written or verbal exchange-based (Mu'awadah) contracts  are considered to be owned by the Institution  or the company,  and Zak.ah has to be paid on them even if the goods in question have not been delivered. That is to say such amounts should not be deducted from zakatable assets.

6/3/10Due taxes: Tax amounts that relate to the current period, but has to be paid in the next period  should be deducted from zakatable assets.

6/3/11Security amounts paid by clients to guarantee fulfillments of their commitments  and settlement of periodical bills should be deducted from zakatable assets.

6/3/12Minority rights which refer to other shareholders' equity in the subsidiary, and which appear in the consolidated financial statements should become subject to the rulings indicated in item 4/2/5.

7. Provisions

7/1  Definition of provisions

Provisions represent the amounts retained from revenues at the end of the financial period so as to cater for probable shortage of assets, or to meet imprecisely determined or unforeseen commitments of the Institution. Since provisions are estimates of probable loss amounts and unspecified commitments, they have to be totally or partially returned back to the profit and loss account (income statement), if



891





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

the debt is collected or the commitment is fulfilled, or ifthe provision amount is more than it should have been.

7/2 Classification ofprovisions

Regarding provisions, the following should be observed:

7/2/1  Provisions relating to fixed assets: Such provisions are nonde• ductible from Zakah assets, since fixed assets are not part of the Zakah base.

7/2/2 Provisions relating to current assets: Since Zakah is calculable on the basis of market value, provisions relating to current assets are not considered as part of liabilities to be deducted from zakatable assets. If, for any reason, current  assets are valued for Zakah calculation at book value which happens to be more than  exchange value, the difference between book value and  market value pertinent  to provisions should be deducted from Zakatable assets.

7/2/3 Provisions relating  to liabilities: Liability provisions which aim to cover imprecisely determined  commitments  of the company such as provisions for: end of service benefits, staff leaves, taxation,  and indemnities,  shall be reasonable so as not  to become  secret reserves. Whenever  exaggeration  in such provisions is discovered, the excess amount  should be removed.

7/2/4 In the cases when the provision  is deductable  from assets interest should not be deducted if it happens to be involved in it. Deduction from assets in this case should include only the Sharf'ah-recognizable commitment.  It should, however, be noted that interest bearing deposits and loans are strictly prohibited by Sharfah.  [see item 6/2/3]

7/3 Applications relating to provisions

7/3/1 Provision for redemption of pre-operating expenses: It is the cumulative amount of the redeemed part of pre-operating ex• penses. This provision is not deductable from zakatable assets.



892





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

7/3/2  Provision for deterioration  in the value of investments in shares purchased for acquisition: This provision  is meant to cater for price decline in financial markets,  or book value, below cost; in case of valuation at cost or market value whichever  the less. Such provision is not deductable from  zakatable assets.

7/3/3  Provision for perishable  or slow moving goods: In case of slow moving  goods the provision  is to cover probable  declines in value due to expiry,  obsolescence  of type, or slow marketing. This provision  is not deductable from zakatable assets.

7/3/4  Provision for probable declines in the prices of goods or financial papers: This provision is usually made to cater for declines which actually take place, and it is not deductable from Zakatable assets.

7/3/5  Provision for leaves: It is the amount deducted from revenues so as to cater for the commitment  of the institution to compensate staff for leave entitlements. This provision  is not  deductable from Zakatable assets.

7/3/6  Provision for end of service and retirement benefits or pension salary of staff: It refers to the amounts  deducted from revenues for meeting payment of such obligations. Such amounts are not deductable  from  Zakatable  assets because  they  are  allocated for disbursement, but not yet disbursed. They can be deducted only when they are actually paid or when they become due for payment  during the current year, but not yet settled.

7/3/7 Provision  for indemnity: It refers to the  estimated amounts deducted from  revenues  in  order  to  cater  for a confirmed commitment relating to an initial legal verdict  (before appeal) stipulating the  payment of a specific  amount as indemnity to a certain  party.  Such provision  is estimated  according to the  amounts   mentioned in  the  verdict,  and  it  should  not be deducted from  Zakatable  assets until  it becomes  due for payment by virtue  of a final verdict.

7/3/8  Provision for maintenance: It is an amount allocated for spend•
ing, but not yet spent. It is not deductable from Zakatable assets.



893





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

7/3/9 Provision for insurance offixed assets: This provision refers to the amounts charged to the revenues of the company to sub• stitute the premiums that will be paid to insurance companies. This provision is estimated as per the amounts of its compo• nents. It should not be deducted from Zakatable assets because it comprises amounts that have been allocated for spending, but still owned by the company.

7/3/10  Provision for decrease in the price of currencies: It is the amount charged to the revenues of the company to cater for probable decline of the prices of foreign currencies against the price of the currency used in the financial statements of the company. It is assessed on the basis of the difference between the two prices (purchase price and market price). Such provision  is not deductable from zakatable assets, because what matters is the prevailing exchange price at the time ofvaluation of Zakatable assets.

7/3/11  Provision for taxes: It refers to the estimated amounts deducted from the revenues ofthe company for settlement ofthe unpaid taxes of the current year. Such provision is assessed  according to size of activity during the current financial period, besides the tax level in the previous financial periods. This provision
is not deductable from Zakatable assets.

8. Reserves

8/1  Definition of reserves

Reserves are amounts deducted from profits by virtue oflaw (statutory reserves), or as required by articles of association of the Institution, or on the basis of a decision by the general assembly (voluntary reserves). Reserves provide necessary funds for many purposes such as future expansion, facing probable losses, distribution  of profits in the years when no profits are realized, and distribution of the accumulated amounts of the reserves when they are no longer needed.



894





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

8/2  Nature and Shari'ah status (Hulan) of reserves

8/2/1 Both  types  of  reserves  (statutory  and  voluntary)  are  not deductable  from  zakatable assets,  because in Sharf'ah they are not  considered to  constitute  debt obligations owed by the company, although it is referred to under liabilities. Since reserves are owned by the company they should be subject to Zakah as part of Zakatable assets, in case of applying the net assets method of Zakah assessment.

8/2/2 In spite of the fact that the capital account and the issuance premium  provide sources of funding for the company they are not considered to be part of its debt obligations, even if capital is usually referred to under liabilities. Therefore, capi• tal account and issuance premium  are not deductable  from Zakatable assets.

8/3  Applications relating to reserves

8/3/1  Revaluation reserve (capital reserves): It results from revaluation of fixed assets at current market value,  and since fixed assets are not subject to Zakah, such reserve is not deductable from Zakatable assets.

8/3/2 Income reserve: It refers to that part  of distributable  profit which is retained by an administrative decision in provision for future need. It is not a debt obligation owed by the Institution, and therefore should not be deducted from Zakatable assets.

8/3/3 Reserve of profits earned  from share purchasing  operation (institution's treasury shares): This reserve results from the act ofthe Institution when it purchases and sells its own shares. It is not deductable from Zakatable assets, since it is part of the profits.

8/3/4 Reserve of profits declared for distribution: It refers to the profit declared by the board of directors, but the decision for its distribution has not yet been taken.



895





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

8/3/5 Reserve of retained profits:  This reserve comprises the profits earmarked for transference to forthcoming years. It constitutes one type of income  reserves,  and  is not  deductable  from Zakatable assets.

9. Eight Heads of Zakah Disbursement

The heads of Zakah disbursement  are the eight categories specified by the Verse which  states: {"As-Sadaqat (here it means Zakat)  are only for  the Fuqara'  (poor),  and Al-Masakin  (the poor)  and those employed to collect (the funds); andfor to attract the hearts ofthose who have been inclined (towards Islam); and tofree the captives; and for those in debt; and for Allah's Cause (i.e., for Mujahidun - those fighting in the holy wars),  and for  the wayfarer (a traveller who is cut offfrom everything) a duty imposed by Allah. And Allah is All• Knower, All-Wise."}Shari'ah Supervisory Boards of the institutions may specify the meaning and appropriate way of application, for each one of these categories.

IO. Rulings Relating to Zakah Disbursement

10/1 The  Zakah payer  (institution)  cannot  discharge of his Zakah commitment by relieving his debtors from their debt obligations. This, however, does not mean that Zakah recipients cannot repay their debts out of the Zakah amounts which they receive from their creditors, provided that such arrangement does not involve collusion or a pre-stated condition.

10/2 In principle, Zakah is to be paid as soon as it is due, yet it can be delayed - for not more than one year - due to shortage of funds, or if its distribution is made according to a certain time schedule, or for any other obvious interest.

10/3  Institutions should establish a special fund or account for Zakah.

10/4 In principle,  Zakah should  be spent on its eight heads,  yet if
need arises Zakah funds can be utilized in investment projects.

(4) [AI-Tawbah (Repentance): 60]



896





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

However,  such  projects  should,  at  the  end,  be  owned  by  the Zakah  recipients,  or put under the supervision of the competent Sharf'ah  body   entrusted  with   collection   and   distribution  of Zakah. Nevertheless,  investment of Zakah  funds should  be after fulfilling the urgent needs of Zakah recipients, and on availability of sufficient safeguards  against losses.

10/5  Zakah does not cease to be valid by prescription.

I 0/6 Zakah can be paid before its due time, subject to specific conditions on which Sharf'ah boards should be consulted.

I 0/7 Zakah can permissibly  be paid in terms  of the equivalent value of the subject commodity.
10/8  Zakah  should  not necessarily  cover all the eight heads of its dis•
bursement.  It can permissibly be confined to some of them.

10/9  Zakah funds can be transferred from place of payment to another place due to an obvious interest to be judged by the Shari'ah boards of the institutions.





























897





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

11. Nisab and Zakah Rate for Livestock (An'am)

11/1 Nisab and Zak.ah rate on camels



From                 To                           Obligatory Zak.ah Rate
1        --


4
----I


Nothing
5                       9                                               1  goat
10     ---; .....--  14     -       2goats
15      --
19     -

3 goats
20                     24                                             4 goats
25     --

35              Bint Makhad camel (at the second year of age)
36                     45
Bint Labun camel (at the third year of age)
46     --  60
-- Hiqqah camel (at the fourth year ofage)
61                        75                     Jaza'ah camel (at the fifth year ofage)
76    -- 90     -

2 BintLabun
91                       120                                           2Hiqqah
121                    129                                        3 BintLabun

130

....,     
139    -

1 Hiqqah + 2 Bint Labun
140                    149                              2 Hiqqah + 1 Bint Labun

150

_,   
159     -

3 Hiqqah
160                    169                                        4BintLabun

170
----
179     -

1  Hiqqah + 3 Bint Labun
180                      189                                  2 Hiqqah + 2 Bint Labun
+ 1  Bint Labun
190                    199                               3 Hiqqah
200                   209                             4 Hiqqah or 5 Bint Labun
d      d
210                   219                              1 Hiqqah + 4 Bint Labun

220
--  229    -

2 Hiqqah + 3 Bint Labun
230                   239                              3 Hiqqah + 2 Bint Labun
240                   249                              4 Hiqqah + 1 Bint Labun

For more than 249, one Hiqqah for every 50 camels and one Bint-labun for every 40 camels.






898





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

11/2 Nisab and Zak.ah rate on cows

From             To                                Obligatory Zakah Rate

1                              29
..;1--

Nothing
30                39                      Tabee'a or Tabee'ah (at 2nd year of age)
..;i--
40                59    ~~
Musinnah (at 3rd year of age)
60                69                                   2 Tabee'a or 2 Tabee'ah

70                79                            Musinnah + Tabee'a or Tabee'ah
t
80                89                                           2Musinnah

90                99
1--
100               109

3 Tabee'a or 3 Tabee'ah

~ Musinnah + 2 Tabbee'a or 2 Tabee'ah
1--
110              119                             2 Musinnah + Tabee'a or Tabee'ah

120               129                       3 Musinnah or 4 Tabee'a or 4 Tabee'ah

For more than 129, one Tabee'a or one Tabee'ah for every 30 cows and one
Musinnah for every 40 cows.

11/3 Nisab and Zakah rates on goats

From                         To
1            ---  39
40                              120


I                                 Obligatory Zakah  Rate

Nothing

1  goat

121

201

.
---

200

399

2 goats

3 goats
400                            499
4 goats

For more than  499, one goat for every 100 goats.


12. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 30 Dhul-Qa'dah 1429 A.H., corresponding to 28 November  2008 A.D.







899
