Shari'ah Standard No. (33)




Waqf












Contents


Subject                                                        Page

Preface                                                                                                             813
Statement ofthe Standard...................................................................         814

1. Scope of the Standard...........................................................................          814
2. Definition, Shari'ah Rulings, Rationale of Permissibility and Types ofWaqf....................................................................................................          814
3. Basic Elements ofWaqf                                                                            815

4.  Condition in Waqf.................................................................................          819
5. Supervision and Management ofWaqf                                                    820
6. Controls on Leasing ofWaqf Assets....................................................          823
7. Application of Modes of Investment for Development of Waqf
Income and Assets.................................................................................           824
8. Maintenance, Renovation and Replacement ofWaqf Assets...........           825
9. Istibdal (Exchange) ofWaqf Assets........................................................           826
10. Date of Issuance of the Standard..........................................................          827
Adoption of the Standard....................................................................          828
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard...........          829
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard..................................          831
Appendix (c):  Definitions...........................................................................          836
















811








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This standard aims at indicating the basic Shari'ah rulings on Waqf, which constitute the basis for practical application in this area. The standard also indicates the role of Islamic financial Institutions (Institution/Institutions) in supervision, management and investment ofWaqfproperties.































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



813




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This  standard presents  the  definition  of Waqf  and  discusses  its types, Shari'ah rulings, basic elements,  and the conditions  that pertain  to each of these elements. It also covers the conditions  required  in the Waqf and the  Waqif  (donor),  and  illustrates  the  appropriate   methods  for Waqf utilization, investment, supervision  and management. Furthermore, the standard covers the crucial role that Islamic financial Institutions could play in the development  of Waqf, and the appropriate  methods  of Waqf investment.

This standard, however, does not cover other philanthropic Institutions such  as Irsad  (allocation  of public  property for  public  utilities)  and financial trusts which resemble Waqf in some aspects.

2. Definition, Shari'ah Rulings, Rationale of Permissibility and Types of
Waqf

2/1  Definition ofWaqf

In Arabic language the word Waqf or Hahs means preventing some• thing from movement. In Shari'ah terminology, Waqf refers to making a property invulnerable to any disposition  that leads to transfer  of ownership, and donating the usufruct of that property to beneficia• ries.

2/2  Shari'ah status of Waqf

Waqf  is  permissible  in  Shari'ah,  as  has  been  emphasized  by  the Sunnah (Prophetic traditions) and Ijma (consensus ofFuqaha). Waqf is also a binding commitment,  and, therefore, declaring a property  as Waqf would  spontaneously deprive  its donating  owner the right of ownership.



814





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

2/3 Permissible types of Waqf

There  are  several types  Waqf  of which  most  important  is the charitable Waqf (al-Waqf al-Khayri), the family Waqf (al- Waaf al• Ahli),  the joint  Waqf (al-Waqf al-Mushtarak)  and  self-dedicated Waqf (al- Waqf 'Ala al-Nafs).

2/3/1 Waqf is said to be charitable when its income/usufruct is dedi•
cated for a charitable purpose.

2/3/2 A family Waqf is the Waqf in which the income/usufruct is reserved  for specifically  described  persons,  usually family members  and relatives. The income/usufruct of such Waqf goes to a charitable purpose when none of these persons is existent.

2/3/3 Joint Waqf refers to the case in which the property is donated to family as well as charitable purposes, and the income/usufruct here is shared accordingly.

2/3/4 In case of self-dedicated Waqf the donor retains the income/ usufruct  of the donated property  for himself as long as he is alive, and indicates the charitable purpose which shall be entitled to the income/usufruct of the Waqf after his death.

3. Basic Elements of Waqf

The basic elements of Waqf include: The form of donation, the Waqif
(the donor) and the donated property.

3/1  The form of the Waqf

3/1/1 The form of the Waqf comprises "offer" only, as it does not necessitate "acceptance': When a legally competent beneficiary rejects a Waqf that has been earmarked for him, his rejection has to be concurred to, yet the Waqf shall still remain valid. In this case the Waqf- or the share of the rejecting beneficiary if beneficiaries are many - should go to charitable purposes.

3/1/2 Formation of Waqf can take place verbally,  in writing,  or in any form of disposition which is normally considered as indi• cating it.



815




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

3/1/3 Waqf can be declared as effective starting from a future date, as when the donor declares his property to become Waqf starting from next year.

3/1/4 In principle  Waqf should be eternal. Nevertheless temporary Waqf  is also permissible when  the donor  desires to get back his property after a specific period.
3/2 The Waqif (donor)

3/2/1  The Waqif  can be a natural  or a legal person.  If the Waqif is a legal  person,   the  Waqf  decision   should  be  made  by  the general assembly and not the board  of directors.

3/2/2 The Waqifmust be legally eligible for disposing ofhis property.

3/2/3 The  Waqf  decision  of a person  whose  legal  competence is restricted because  of irrationality is invalid, except  when  he declares his property as Waqf for himself as long as he is alive. The  validity  of the  Waqf  decision  of a person  whose  legal competence  is  restricted because   of indebtedness  depends on confirmation by his creditors. When  the  creditors refrain from  confirming the Waqf  of the indebted person,  the Waqf becomes  invalid.

3/3  The beneficiary

3/3/1 The Waqf should  not be made for an impermissible purpose, although  it may not be for a charitable  purpose since the very beginning of its inception.

3/3/2 It is permissible to make Waqf for the benefit of non-Muslims, provided that the cause to be served  does not involve  a sin. It is also permissible  to make Waqf for the benefit  of the rich.

3/3/3  The Waqfbeneficiary need not be present at the time ofdeclaring theWaqf.

3/3/4 When the  beneficiary/beneficiaries of the  Waqf  is/are  no longer  existent, the benefits  of the Waqf should  go to charity purposes.



816





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

3/4 The Waqf property

3/4/1  The Waqf property  should fulfill the following conditions:

a) It shall be a Shari'ah-accepted property b) It shall be known
c) The Waqif shall be the sole owner of the property in which
nobody else should have a right of disposition  at the time of establishing the Waqf. If the Waqif himselfhas the option of disposing of the property, the Waqf shall become valid, and the option is spontaneously cancelled.

3/4/2 The Waqf has a legal personality  and financial liability which make it capable of giving and accepting commitment. The legal personality  of the Waqf is quite separate from the personality of its manager.

3/4/3 Types ofWaqf properties

3/4/3/1 Waqfis permissible in real estate along with permanent furniture and fittings.

3/4/3/1 Waqf is permissible  in movable  assets, whether  such movable assets are part of a real estate or independent.

3/4/3/2 Waqf is permissible  in money. The income  generated from utilization of the money is to be spent, while re• taining  the principal  amount.  Utilization may include, for instance, Shari'ah-based lending as well as permis• sible and  safe investments  like Mudarabah  where the profit share owned by the Waqf goes to beneficiaries.

3/4/3/4 Waqf is permissible  in  Sharf'ah-accepted  shares  and Sukuk. In this case, the income earned by these shares or  Sukuk  is to  be  spent  on  the  Waqf  beneficiaries. In case of liquidation the Shari'ah rulings  on Istibdal (exchange ofWaqf property) should be applied.

3/4/4 Waqf in common  property

3/4/4/1 Waqf can be a common property, whether such property is divisible or not. The whole common property  in this



817




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

case (not shares or Sukuk), can be leased and the Waqf gets its respective share ofthe rent.

Alternatively, the share of the Waqf in the common property  can be leased, so that the usufruct can be utilized through time-based and place-based Muhaya'h (succession), while  the  rental  income  goes to  the beneficiaries of the Waqf.

3/4/4/2 When the Waqfsuperintendent or the Waqfpartner asks for the division of an indivisible Waqf, the refraining party should be forced to accept selling. The income obtained from selling the Waqf in this manner should be used for purchasing a Waqf property of the same kind.

Ifsuch request for division is made in case ofa divisible Waqf, the refraining party should be forced to accept division.

3/4/5 Waqf as a floor in a building, and easement eights (Irtifaq or
Ta'alli)

Waqf can be a floor in a building. It can also enjoy easement rights  (Haqq  al-Irtifaq)  in a building  that has not yet been constructed. In this case the Waqf can enjoy the right of Ta'alli (transcendence) when the upper floor is declared as Waqfwhile the owner ofthe lower floor is unable to perform construction. The lower floor in such case can be built at the cost ofthe Waqf (on permission  of the  concerned  authorities)  and the  cost reimbursed  to the Waqf from the income generated through its leasing.

3/4/6 Waqf as a usufructs

Waqf can be a usufruct  of an asset which the Waqif acquires through rent. The Waqif can lease the asset once again, and the proceeds go to the Waqfbeneficiaries. The Waqf, in this case, is to be made temporary according to the period of the original



818





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

rent. Waqf can take place in this manner when the owner of the property does not deprive the lessee the right of subleasing.
4. Condition  in Waqf

4/1  Conditions pertainin g to the Waqf contract

4/1/1 The Waqifhas the right to make his Waqf subject to all condi• tions which do not contradict with Sharf'ah, and his conditions shall be as enforceable as Shari'ah conditions. The conditions of every Waqif must be understood with due consideration  to the prevailing norms in his environment.  Such conditions may in• clude, for example, designating a certain superintendent for the Waqf and specifying his remuneration  package. The designated superintendent could be an individual,  a group  of people, or an institution.

4/1/2  Regarding the form ofthe Waqf, the Waqifcan make a condition that his debts should be settled from the Waqf income; after his death,  or he may stipulate a condition  that the income of his Waqf should go to him first as long as he is alive, then  to his family, and finally to charitable purposes. Another condition of the Waqif could be that the Waqf income has to be spent first on any member  of his family who becomes poor, and then on charity purposes.

4/1/3 A condition stipulated by the Waqif is invalid when it comprises an impermissible element, or when itviolates the Sharf'ah rulings on Waqf or cause harm to the Waqf property. In such cases the condition  should be rejected and the Waqf shall remain valid. Examples of invalid conditions include: absolute forbiddance of Istibdal (exchange) of the Waqf, or forbiddance of the dismissal of the Waqf superintendent for any reason.

A condition  stipulated by the Waqif also becomes invalid when it tends to hinder  the interests  of the Waqf, or jeopardize  the process ofbenefiting from it. The example ofthis is a condition which requires starting- at all times - with distribution of the



819




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

Waqf income among the beneficiaries, even if the Waqf is in need of maintenance or renovation.

4/1/4 When the Waqifstipulates a condition that the Waqfshould be benefited from through  residence, the Waqf can be benefited from either in that manner, or through leasing, and vice versa

5. Supervision and Management of Waqf

5/1  Controls on supervision  and management of Waqf

Supervision and management ofWaqfshould observe the Sharf'ah rulings  on Waqf, then  the conditions of the Waqif which  do not contradict with  Shari'ah or hinder the  interests  of the  Waqf  as perceived by the judiciary.

5/2  Tasks of the Waqf superintendent

The WaqfSuperintendent should perform the following tasks, among others:

5/2/1 Management, maintenance  and development ofthe Waqf.

5/2/2 Leasing of the assets or usufructs of the Waqf (through oper- ating-lease contracts), and leasing ofthe Waqflands.

5/2/3 Development ofthe Waqfproperties either directly in Sharf'ah• sanctioned methods ofinvestment, or through Islamic financial institutions.

5/2/4 Increasing the Waqfmoney by investing it through Mudarabah and other similar forms.

5/2/5 Changing  the operational  form of the Waqf assets with the aim of maximizing  the benefit that results to the Waqf and its beneficiaries.  This may include,  for instance,  converting a residential building into a commercial building, or construct• ing buildings for rent on an agricultural land, provided that this would satisfy the demand of the people, generate more income for the Waqf and is done with the permission of the concerned authorities.



820





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

5/2/6 Defending  the rights  of the Waqf,  ensuring  its sustainability, payment  of fees to agents in case of law suits filed against the Waqf,  and  payment   of expenses  for  documentation  of the assets and the rights of the Waqf.

5/2/7 Settlement of the debts of the Waqf.

5/2/8 Payment of the entitlements  of beneficiaries

5/2/9 Replacement of the Waqf either by selling it for a cash amount and purchasing  a new asset, or exchanging it with a new asset, subject to the conditions  of Istibdal (exchange). [see item 9]

5/2/10  Safeguarding the Waqf properties against occupation or seizure by others.

5/2/11  Using solidarity insurance to safeguard the Waqfassets, whenever possible.

5/2/12  Preparation of the Waqf accounts, and submission of statements and reports on them to the concerned authorities.

5/3  What shall not be done by the Waqf Superintendent

The Waqf superintendent shall not do the following:

5/3/1  Neglecting the conditions  of the Waqif.

5/3/2 Leasing the Waqf to himself or to one of his dependant  sons • even if such leasing is at more than  the normal  rent - except through  the judiciary. He should not also lease the Waqf to one of his direct relatives (Usul and Frua') or to his spouse, for less than  the normal  rent of similar property. In this case, minor injustice (Ghabn) is not forgivable, although  it is forgivable in leasing to nonrelatives.

5/3/3 Using the  Waqf income  for increasing  the  Waqf properties, except when this is done in fulfillm ent ofa condition stipulated by the Waqif.

5/3/4 Mortgaging the Waqf assets for a debt to be obtained  for the
Waqf or the beneficiaries.



821




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

5/3/5 Lending the Waqf assets, and if he does so, the borrower has to pay the normal rent for similar assets.

5/3/6 Borrowing for the Waqf, except in fulfillment of a condition stipulated by the Waqif, or on permission ofthe legal authorities, and in case ofnecessity. In borrowing for the Waqfthe following should be observed:

5/3/6/1 Establishing a debt obligation on the Waqf is pennis• sible through  permissible  means  of borrowing,  or deferred payment purchase, or any other permissible mode of financing. Establishing the debt through any of these modes has to be for the sake of maintaining and developing the Waqf, as per a condition stipulated by the Waqif, or on permission  of the legal authori• ties, and due to necessity. In establishing the debt, due consideration shall also be given to the ability of the Waqf to bear such debt and sufficiency of its income for repayment. These restricted forms of establishing debt obligations on the Waqf do not include the case when the Waqf superintendent  pays a certain amount of money from his own sources for an interest which concerns the Waqf, and the Waqf has sufficient in• come to be resorted to for settlement of such debt.

5/3/6/2 Cases which justify borrowing  for the Waqf, when borrowing is not sanctioned by a condition stipulated by the Waqif:
a) Need for maintenance or necessary development of the Waqfand absence ofsufficient Waqfincome for that.
b) Payment offmancial commitments -- if any - when the Waqf does not have sufficient funds.
c) Inability to pay the wages ofthe employees working in the Waqf or those who serve its purposes, and fear from endangering the benefits of the Waqf.



822





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

5/3/6/3 Borrowing should not be for the sake of spending on the beneficiaries of the Waqf.

5/4 Spending the excess income of the Waqf of a mosque

In principle the income of the Waqf of a specific mosque is to be spent on its own interests. Ifthere is still an excess amount ofincome which has not been spent, it is permissible to transfer such amount to another mosque that does not have enough income to cover its expenses, or the cost of its maintenance and renovation.

5/5  Judicial supervision on Waqf management

5/5/1  Byvirtue ofpublic guardianship, the judiciaryhas the authority of overseeing the supervision and management  of the Waqf, preservation of its assets, and development of its sources. The judiciary has also the right of investigating the overall status of the Waqf, looking into any complaints raised against the Waqf superintendent  or any other party, and subjecting the Waqf superintendent to disciplinary action.

6. Controls on Leasing of Waqf Assets

6/1 In principle, a long period  of leasing should not be the normal practice for Waqf assets, except for obvious interest, and provided that a variable rent, linked to an accurate and well known index, is going to be sought.  [see Shari'ah Standard No. (9) on Ijarah and Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek, item 5/2/3]

6/2  The normal rent of similar property as a condition

Waqf assets or usufructs should not be leased at less than the rent of similar property. When leasing at a lower rent is inevitable it should be considered in view of the actual necessity, and hence,  excessive injustice (Ghabn Fahish) can be accepted.  If there happen  to be a new tenant who can pay the rent of similar property, the Waqf superintendent  has the right to terminate the previous contract, unless the old tenant accepts the rent increment. If the normal rent for the Waqf in question has risen because of developing the Waqf



823




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

land and constructing a new building  on it at the cost of the Waqf, the tenant  is obliged to accept rent increment.  If land development and construction of the building is done at the cost of the tenant, he is not bound  to accept the rent increment.

6/3  Some permissible forms ofWaqfleasing

6/3/1  Signing a lease contract with the aim of keeping the Waqfland in the hands  of the tenant  as long as he pays the normal  rent for similar property  as it changes according to circumstances. This type of contract  is known  as (Hikr) and is subject to the following conditions:

6/3/1/1 The Waqfhas no income to be used for its development.

6/3/1/2 There  is no person  who  is willing to have fixed-term rent and make advance payment  so as to be spent on developing the Waqf.
6/3/1/3 Istibdal (exchange) of the Waqf is not possible

6/3/2  Haqq al-Qarar  (right  to  stay)  which  a tenant  deserves when he pays at the time of signing the lease contract  a lump  sum amount, known  as (Kardar) for development of the Waqf,  and a rent which is below the rent of similar property. This form of Waqf leasing is permissible when  dictated by necessity, and if there is no tenant who is willing to pay the normal rent for similar property along with a lump sum amount for development of the Waqf. In some countries, this contractual form is known as (al• Khulu).

7. Application of Modes of Investment for Development of Waqf Income and Assets
7/1  It is permissible to invest Waqf income, in the following cases:

1-  As per a condition  stipulated  by the Waqif.

2- During the waiting period (prior to identification ofbeneficiaries).

3- Excess income, after payment  to beneficiaries.



824





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

Investment in these cases should be through permissible methods such as Mudarabah, Musharakah, Murabahah, Ijarah, and Salam, and in low risk investments.

7/2 For development of the Waqfland, the following is permissible:

7/2/1 Application  of the  Istisna'a through  B.O.T.  contracts.  [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (11) on Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a, item 3/2/1]

7/2/2 Application of diminishing Musharakah, where the Waqf and the financing partner  construct  the building through  joint financing (excluding the Waqf land), and the Waqf gradually owns the building. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (12) on Sharikah (Musharakh) and Modern Corporations, item 5/8]

7/2/3 Application of Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek for a specifically described propertyto be delivered in the future. In this case, the Waqf land is leased to the financier who constructs a building on it and delivers it to the Waqf to execute the lease contract At the end of the contracting period, the Waqf becomes the owner ofthe building. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (9) on Ijarah and Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek, item 3/5]

7/3 AIl appropriate means should be adopted for development ofAwqaf, with due consideration to Shari'ah rulings on Waqfand the conditions stipulated by the Waqifs, as well as present day requirements.

7/4 Help in this regard should be sought from Islamic financial institu•
tions, specialized in Waqf investments.

8. Maintenance, Renovation and Replacement ofWaqf Assets

8/1  Maintenance and renovation  of Waqf assets, and allocation  of reserves for that purpose

8/1/1 Spending on maintenance, reparation  and renovation of the Waqf assets should precede distribution  of the Waqf income among beneficiaries. In this connection, due consideration shall be given to the technical schedules ofperiodical maintenance.



825




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

Maintenance and reparation ofWaqf assets also do not require a prior condition to be stipulated by the Waqif.

8/1/2 Maintenance   and  renovation   requirements   (maintenance reserve) shall be retained from the Waqf income every year even if the Waqif has not stipulated such a condition. The reserve, thus deducted, can be invested in a safe and easy to liquidate form ofinvestment, and the returns be added to the principal  amount.  The beneficiaries shall have no right on the maintenance  reserve, unless part of it turns out to be in excess of actual needs.

8/1/3 In the absence of sufficient amounts  for maintenance  and renovation of a leased Waqf asset, the Waqf superintendent has the right to allow the tenant to make such maintenance and renovation,  against having the priority  to continue  as a tenant of the Waqf asset until getting full repayment of his debt.

8/1/4 Solidarity insurance shall be used for maintenance or renova•
tion of the Waqf assets.

8/2 Making allocations for replacement of Waqf assets

It is permissible to deduct from the Waqf income (after distribution to beneficiaries) periodical amounts commensurate to the economic lifetime ofthe depreciating Waqf assets, so as to use the accumulated amount for replacement ofthese assets (depreciation allowance).

9. Istibdal  (Exchange) ofWaqf Assets

9/1  Istibdal refers to the process ofselling the Waqf asset and purchasing a new one instead, so as to maximize the interest ofthe Waqf.

9/2 Istibdal can take place according to a condition  stipulated by the Waqif,  or when the Waqf becomes ruined  (even  if prevented  by the Waqif).  Istibdal,  in such cases, takes place by selling the Waqf property and purchasing a new one instead, so as to maintain the Waqf as it was before.



826





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

Istibdal is also permissible  when there is no way of benefiting  from the Waqf (e.g., the Waqfhas become in a deserted  area), or because of fear from seizure of the Waqf by others, or when benefiting  from the Waqfbecomes extremely difficult.
9/3 Istibdal should be subject to the following conditions:

9/3/1  The Waqf must have reached the stage of generating no income, while there is no money for its development.

9/3/2 There should be no excessive injustice in the sale price.

9/3/3 Istibdal should meet the satisfaction and interest of the Waqf.

9/3/4 Istibdal should be permitted by the judiciary.

9/3/5  If the Waqf is a real estate it should also be exchanged for a real estate. When there is no risk of misuse, a real estate Waqf can be sold for cash, and the money kept with the judiciary until a new real estate is purchased.

1 O. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 28 Jumada II, 1429 A.H., corresponding to
2 July 2008 A.D.


























827




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted the Standard on Waqf in its meeting No. (21) held on 24-28 Jumada II,  1429 A.H., corresponding to 28 June - 2
July 2008 A.D., in  Dar Al-Taqwa Hotel, Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.











































828





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 5 Rabi' I, 1427 A.H., corresponding to 4 April 2006 A.D., the Secretariat General decided to assign to a Shari'ah consultant the preparation of a study on Waqf.

On 8-9 Rabi' I, 1427 A.H., corresponding to 6-7 April 2006 A.D., a joint meeting of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) was held in Makkah AI-Mukarramah, and discussed the study. The meeting requested the  consultant to introduce  necessary amendments  in the  light of the discussions and observations of the joint committee members.

On  19  Shawwal  1427  A.H.,  corresponding  to  10  November  2006
A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee  (2) held a meeting in Manama (Kingdom ofBahrain) in which it discussed the draft ofthe standard and requested the consultant to introduce necessary amendments in the light of the discussions and observations of the meeting.

In its meeting No. (17) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 26 Shawwal
- 1  Dhul-Qa'dah 1427 A.H., corresponding to 18-23 November 2006 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed the changes in the Standard which had been made by the joint meeting of Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2), and introduced changes that it deemed necessary.

The Secretarial General ofAAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 18  Safar  1428  A.H.,  corresponding to 8 March 2007 A.D. More than 30 participants attended the session as representatives of central banks, Institutions, and accounting firms. The session was also attended by Shari'ah scholars, university teachers and other interested parties. Several observations were made in the  session,  and  duly responded to by the members of the Sharf'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2).



829




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

In its meeting No. (19) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 26 Sha'ban
- 1  Ramadan 1428 A.H., corresponding to 8-12 September 2007 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the amendments that had been suggested in the public hearing, introduced changes that it deemed necessary and adopted the Standard.

















































830





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


The basis for considering Waqf (in principle) as a permissible and re• commendable practice (Mandub) is the Quranic Verses which instruct people to do good and spend on charitable causes, and also the Hadith (Prophetic tradition)  which indicates:  "When a person  dies his rightful deeds will stop except in three respects: An ongoing charity "Sadaqah Ja• riyah...". Waqf is considered to be the ongoing charity referred to in the Hadith, because the beneficiary does not own the Waqf asset, and accor• dingly, cannot dispose of it.
Moreover, there is the Hadith about the piece of land in Khybar which Umar donated as Waqf, when the Prophet (peace be upon him) advised him to do so.
Again, permissibility ofWaqfis supported by the practice ofthe Sahabah (Prophet's Companions)  like Uthman  and Abu Talhah, in addition  to Ijma' (consensus of Fuqaha). Waqf for charitable purposes  can also be justified through  Qiyas (analogical deduction)  in comparison  to Waqf for mosques.
Enforceability ofthe Waqfwhen it is indicated by a donor in his will, stems from the fact that according to Shari'ah a will should be executed, and its alteration or cancelation is strictly prohibited
• Family Waqf ( Waqfahli or Dhurri) is permissible on the basis of the Ha• dith about Umar's Waqf, and because family Waqf is, in fact, a charitable Waqf since it will finally become so.
■  Acceptance of the Waqf is not  a condition  for its validity when  the beneficiary is not specified, because acceptance cannot be expected in this case. In case of a specific beneficiary, acceptance can be obtained from him even if implicitly when he keeps silent. The ruling that when the beneficiary rejects the Waqfhis rights in the Waqf shall be dropped, whereas the Waqf should still remain valid, is based on the viewpoint of



831




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

the Hanafi School of fiqh. The justification here is that the beneficiary can drop his own rights in the Waqf, but he cannot nullify the Waqf itself.
■  Waqf inception can be subject to any form of disposition which traditio• nally indicates it, because traditions are usually recognizable, when they do not contradict with Sharf'ah rulings.
■  Permissibility of temporary Waqfis based on the viewpoints ofthe Maliki and the Imami Schools of Fiqh, in addition to what has been reported about the viewpoint of Abu Yusuf of the Hanafi School. Such viewpoint is based on the fact that a temporary Waqf can also fulfill its charitable objectives and result in two benefits: one of them is the benefit generated from Waqf throughout  its specified period, and the other is the benefit to the Waqif since he may need his property  in the future. Moreover, permissibility  of temporary  Waqf  could  encourage  Waqf  practicing, and, hence, contribute to fulfillment of the present need for charitable institutions.
■  Permissibility of declaring Waqf as effective starting from a future date
can be viewed in terms of analogy between Waqf and Wasiyyah (will).
■  The ruling that the Waqif should have full legal competence is based on the fact that Waqf in its very essence is a donation (Tabarruw), and there• fore, the Waqif should have full legal competence.
■  Prohibition ofWaqfby a person who is legally restricted for irrationality,
aims at safeguarding his creditors, his own self, and his dependants. There is no harm, however, when the irrational person declares the Waqf for himself. As regards the Waqf by a person who is suffering a fatal illness, it should be subject to the rulings applicable to the will of such person.
■  Permissibility of retreating from Waqf, unless it is a mosque, is the Ha• dith that has been narrated by Abdullah Ibn Umar and Umar's Hadith, as well as Qiyas (analogical deduction) to 'Ariyah (a lent thing).
■ The basis ofthe ruling that Waqfshould not be for an impermissible purpose while it can be for non-charitable purposes, is that Waqf is a donation (Tabarru'), and therefore, the only Shari'ah condition to be observed in it is permissibility ofthe purpose for which the donation is made. This viewpoint belongs to the Maliki School, whereas the Hanafi School is of the opinion that the Waqf purpose should be charitable.



832





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

■  The ruling that Waqf can be made for a person who is nonexistent  at the time  of establishing the  Waqf, is based  on the  Hadiths  narrated about Waqf for progeny, and  on the fact that Waqf is an ongoing  charity and therefore it should include those who will exist in the future.
■  Waqf is said to have a legal personality and financial liability which are quite
independent  from those of its superintendent, because Waqf can give and take commitments. When, for instance, the Waqf superintendent borrows money for the Waqf, the debt obligation does not fall on him but rather on the Waqf itself. Similarly, when the beneficiary fails to fulfill his obligation towards the Waqf, he becomes indebted  to the Waqf, rather  than  to the Waqf superintendent.  Therefore, in this case, the Waqf superintendent has no right to relief the debtor from the debt.
■  The ruling that Waqf donation should not exceed one third of the donor's wealth, is based on the analogy between Waqf and Wasiyyah (will), where part  of the wealth should  be left to the  inheritors  of the  deceased  (the obligatory entitlement as per Shari'ah). This has been explicitly referred to in the Egyptian Law of Awqaf.
■  Permissibility of making Waqf in the form of moveable property, regardless of its nature  and even if such property  is not survivable, is based on the ruling practice during the era of the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) and the orthodox caliphs with respect to making Waqfs for mosques. The majority  of Fiqh scholars also support  this viewpoint; whereas  the Hanafi scholars hold that Waqf of moveable property  is permissible only when it is the normal practice.
■  Money can be donated as a Waqfbecause this is the original form of Waqf,
as emphasized by Muhammad  Ibn Abdullah Al-Ansari the companion  of Imam  Zafar  and  supported  by Ibn Taymiyyah. Shares and Sukuk come under this type of Waqf.
■  A usufruct  can be donated  as Waqf, because  it is wealth,  and hence  it should be subject to the general rules ofWaqf. The fact that a usufruct  is temporary does not affect this ruling  since Waqf can also be temporary as has been indicated earlier.
■  The  ruling  that  permissible  conditions  of the  Waqif  shall be observed
(including  the  ten  conditions),   is based  on  the  Hadith  which  states:



833




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

"Muslims  are bound to the conditions they make".  In the last part of it, this Hadith implies that the donor's condition which has to be observed should not be in contradiction with the Sharf'ah "..except a condition that permits what has been prohibited or prohibits what has been permitted (by Shariah)."
■  The basis for appointing a superintendent for the Waqf is the Hadith which indicates that:  "There is no misdemeanor (Junah) on the one who is in charge ofit", and because interest necessitates the presence of someone who takes care of the investments  of the Waqf assets, collection of the Waqf's income and distributing it among beneficiaries.
■  The Waqf superintendent has to observe the conditions ofthe Waqif be•
cause Waqf is a donation (Tabarruw),  and therefore, it can be subject to conditions according to Shari'ah. As regards observation of the rules of Sharf'ah, the reason is obvious.
■  The basis for depriving the Waqf superintendent  the right of leasing the Waqf to himself or his son (without resorting to legal authorities) is the fear from favoritism which is part of human nature, and therefore prohibition of such leasing arrangement would minimize the chance for neglecting the interest ofthe Waqf.
■  The ruling that a Waqfproperty shall not be lent is based on the fact that
lending the property will reduce the chances for its investment.
■  Borrowing for the Waqf is restricted to the case of acute need, and not allowed for spending on the beneficiaries, because borrowing is meant to safeguard the Waqf against the harm ofbeing useless, whereas refraining from payment to beneficiaries when there is no Waqf income does not involve such harm.
• Permissibility of combining Waqf resources is based on the fact that it could lead to the benefit of the Waqf,  and that all Waqf properties are devoted for the Sake of Allah,  Glory be to Him.  However,  appropriate allocation to the different  beneficiaries of the combined Waqf assets should be duly observed so as not to cause harm to such beneficiaries. The General Council ofFatwa ofKuwait issued a Fatwa (Shari'ah opinion) permitting  transference  of the  excess income  of a mosque  to other mosques.
■  The condition pertaining to the need for judiciary supervision on the Waqf is based on the desire to ensure the achievement of the interests of the



834





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

stakeholders, and perform the role of Hisbah (a Shari'ah regulatory body). The  first person  who  arranged  judiciary  supervision  on  the  Waqf was Tawbah Ibn Namir, the judge of Egypt in the early Islamic era.
■  The ruling that Waqf assets should not be leased for less than the normal rent of similar assets (while minor injustice could be accepted) is based on the desire to avoid favoritism and waste of Waqf income. This viewpoint enjoys  unanimous   agreement  of Muslim  Fiqh  scholars.  The viewpoint regarding  termination   of the  contract  when  the  normal  rent  of similar property  increases and the Waqf tenant refuses rent increment belongs to the Hanafi School, contrary to the Maliki and Shafi'i Schools who hold that the contract should not be terminated  if the lease contract is for a specific period.
• Permissibility  of the forms of Waqf leasing which have been indicated  in Fiqh references is based on the desire to preserve the interests of the Waqf as well as the interests  of all its tenants,  without  causing injustice  to any party or neglecting the interest of the Waqf property.
• Permissibility of application of modern  financing techniques  which have been  developed  by Institutions  rests on the  fact that  such forms are in conformity with  the  usual  forms  of land  leasing  and  cultivation.  Such modern   forms  could  even  generate  more  income  than  the  traditional ones, and achieve the goals ofpreservation and security ofthe Waqf assets.
• Permissibility of making a reserve fund for maintenance and renovation of the Waqf is based on the desire to preserve  the Waqf assets and their ability to generate income, as has been emphasized  by a number  of Fiqh scholars.
• Istibdal (exchange  of the Waqf asset) is permissible  because  it achieves
the interest  of the Waqf, through its development  and maximization of its income.













835




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Waqf

Making  a property   invulnerable  to  any disposition,  and  donating  its income  for charitable  causes. The term  Waqf is also used to describe the property  donated in this manner.

Waqf Ahli (Family Waqf)

The income  of the donated  assets or usufructs  goes in this case to the Waqif himself, his children, a certain number  of people, or a specific entity, for a specific period
Waqf Khayri (Charitable Waqf)

The income of the donated assets or usufructs goes to charitable purposes without specifying a certain entity or a specific group ofpeople as beneficiaries. The Waqf could be eternal or temporary.
Waqf Assets

The property used for generating income, while it cannot be disposed of.

Hiler or Tahkir

A lease contract according to which the Waqfland is kept in the hands of the tenant to build on it or cultivate it as long as he pays the normal rent for such property. Hikr or Tahkir can also take place through utilization of the Waqf land by leasing it for a specific purpose without specifying the period, and thus,  the tenant  obtains the right to stay,  subject to a valid contract. A third  form of Hikr or  Tahkir can take place implicitly when  the land is leased for a specific period, and then the tenant build on it or cultivate it after obtaining the permission  for that. In this latter case, when the lease period expires, and the tenant wishes to stay and pay the rent equivalent to that of similar property, he can be allowed to do so, in order not to cause harm  to



836





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

him. Hikr or Tahkir is an alternative to Istibdal (exchange ofthe Waqfland), when the latter is not possible. These two methods constitute a financial right which cannot be inherited.

Irsad or Takhsis (Allocation)

Irsad refers to the case when the government authorities allocate a pub• licly owned piece of land for public utilities such as schools, hospitals and charitable activities. This is not considered as Waqf because, in this case, the land is allocated by someone who does not own it.

Haq Al-Qrar (Right to Stay)

Preference right to build on or cultivate the Waqf land. A certain type of this contractual arrangement is sometimes  known  as Kadak, and is applicable to leasing of shops and factories.





































837

























