Shari'ah Standard No.  (39)


Mortgage and Its
Contemporary Applications












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface...................................................................................................        967
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        968

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               968
2. Definition of Mortgage                                                                             968
3. Sharf'ah Rulings on Mortgage                                                                  968
4. Mortgage of Financial Papers and Sukuk..............................................       973
5. Mortgage of Current Accounts and Cash Securities............................       974
6. Mortgage of Investment Units and Investment Accounts...................       974
7. Mortgage ofWhat Will Be Owned.........................................................        975
8. Insurance of the Mortgaged Asset..........................................................       975
9. Zakah on the Mortgaged Asset...............................................................        975
10. Date oflssuance of the Standard.............................................................       975
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        976
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard..............        977
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard.....................................       979




















965








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This standard aims to indicate Shari'ah rulings on mortgage and its contemporary applications in Islamic financial institutions (Institution/ Institutions).

































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



967





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard  covers mortgages requested by the Institution  with the aim of documenting  the debts and commitments  owed to it by other individuals and Institutions.  It is also covers the mortgages presented by the Institution to other parties in order to document the debts and commitments  it owes to them. Furthermore, the standard  covers the mortgages which the Institution, in its capacity as a notary or agent, keeps for the benefit of other parties.

2. Definition of Mortgage

To mortgage means to make a financial asset or so tied to a debt so that the asset or its value is used for repayment ofthe debt in case of default

3. Shari'ah Rulings on Mortgage

3/1  Mortgage is permissible in Qur'an,  Sunnah  (Prophetic tradition)
and Ijma' (consensus of Fuqaha).

3/1/1 The mortgage contract is binding for the mortgagor  once it is concluded, and the mortgagor  does not have the right to revoke it from bis own side, whereas the mortgagee has the right to do so.

3/1/2 Possession ofthe mortgaged asset takes place on the basis ofthe same requirements for possession of a sold property. It could be actual possession by putting a hand on the property, which is known as seizure mortgage; or possession could be legal through registration and documentation, which is known as security or formal mortgage. Both types of mortgages are subject to the same rulings.

3/1/3  The mortgagee has the right to appoint an agent to possess the mortgage on his behalf. The agent, thus appointed, should have



968





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications

the same rights of disposition which the principal has.  The mortgage can also be put in the hands of the mortgagee or in the hands of a third party known as the notary, to be agreed upon between the two parties.  When the mortgage is kept by a notary neither of the two parties has the right to transfer it to any other location.

3/1/4 The mortgagee has the right to stipulate a condition that the mortgagor  should  appoint  him  or his representative  as an agent who can sell the mortgaged asset and repay the debt out of its value in case of default, without resorting to judiciary. The mortgagor  does not have the right to retreat from such agency once agreed upon.

3/1/5 The death of the mortgagor or the mortgagee has no effect on the validity ofthe mortgage contract. The respective inheritors shall substitute the dead party.

3/1/6 The mortgage contract is no longer valid when the mortgaged asset perishes unless a compensation for it is obtained (through solidarity insurance, for instance). The mortgage contract can also cease to be valid for other reasons such as termination  of the contract by the mortgagee, settlement of or relief from the debt, or relinquishment  of the mortgage right. Furthermore, the validity of the mortgage contract can also expire as a result of transfer of the ownership of the mortgaged asset (through sale, gift or will) on permission of the mortgagee; unless the new owner accepts to keep the mortgage contract. [see item
3/2/6]

3/1/7 The mortgagee has the right to keep the whole mortgaged asset for any part of the debt, unless he accepts partial releasing of the mortgage.  On repayment of the debt the mortgagee has no right to keep the mortgaged asset as a collateral for a new debt for which the asset is not mortgaged, except when the two parties agree to keep the mortgaged asset as a collateral for any debt between them within a specific period.



969





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications

3/2  Rulings relating to the mortgaged asset

3/2/1  The mortgaged asset should be a Shari'ah-permissible proper• ty.  It should also be well specified  (through pointing,  naming or description)  and can possibly be delivered.

3/2/2 In principle, the mortgaged object should be a tangible asset, yet it can be a debt, a cash amount, a fungible asset or a consumable commodity. Perishable objects can also be mortgaged  as they can be sold and replaced by their value. Moreover, a mortgaged object can be a share ofcommon property which can be identified and sold separately.

3/2/3 The same asset can be mortgaged to more than one mortgagee.
If all mortgages  are of the  same rank  the  consent  of all the parties has to be sought, and the mortgage right in the asset is to be shared among them in proportion  to their respective debts. If the mortgages  are ranked  in such  a way that  a succeeding mortgagee should get his debt repaid only when his precedent mortgagee does, the consent of the succeeding mortgagee alone has to be sought

3/2/4 The mortgaged  asset is a trust in the hands  of the mortgagee, the notary  or the agent and is still owned by the mortgagor  as long as it is mortgaged. Therefore when the mortgaged  asset perishes in  the  hands  of the  mortgagee, the  notary   or the agent, for a reason other than  transgression  or negligence, no responsibility shall rest with him, and the debt shall still remain valid. Ifthe perish of the mortgaged asset is due to transgression or negligence of the mortgagee, the agent or the notary he shall be held responsible for compensation  at the value of the asset on the date of its perish, whereas the debt shall remain  valid. In this case the two parties have the right to perform clearance arrangements  between  the  debt amount  and the value of the perished mortgage asset.
3/2/5 The mortgagor  can mortgage  an asset that is owed to him by the  mortgagee,  whether  the  asset  is kept  by the  mortgagee



970





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications

as a trust  (such as deposited or lent assets and investment accounts); or as a guaranteed asset (such as current accounts and assets retained after nullification ofcontracts). In the latter case the status ofthe mortgagee will consequently change from keeping the asset on guarantee basis to keeping it on the basis of trust

3/2/6 The mortgagor  can mortgage  a borrowed  asset (borrowed mortgage), or a rented asset (rented mortgage), on permission ofthe owner in both cases. If a borrowed or rented mortgage is used for repayment of the defaulted debt, the owner of the asset should have the right of recourse on the mortgagor  for compensation;  in kind if the mortgaged  asset is a fungible asset,  or in value if otherwise.  When  a borrowed  or rented mortgage asset perishes in the hands  of the mortgagor, the mortgagor  has to compensate  the  owner  of the borrowed asset, whereas for the rented asset compensation  is deserved only ifthe perish ofthe mortgaged asset is due to transgression or negligence of the mortgagor.

3/2/7 In a sale contract the seller has the right to stipulate a condition that the buyer, after actual or constructive possession of the good, should mortgage it to him against the deferred price.

3/2/8 Appreciation in the value of the mortgaged asset as well as its income is considered to be mortgaged along with the principal, unless the two parties agree otherwise.

3/2/9 The mortgagor can benefit from the mortgaged asset on permis• sion ofthe mortgagee, whereas the mortgagee has no right at all to enjoy free of charge benefit from the mortgaged asset with or without the permission of the mortgagor. However, on permis• sion of the mortgagor the mortgagee can utilize the mortgaged asset against the normal pay for similar assets.  [see items 3/3/ and 4/3]

3/2/10 The mortgagor  should  bear  all actual expenses relating to reparation ofthe mortgaged asset and its preservation against



971





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications

decay.  When   the  mortgagee   pays  such  expenses  with   or without  the permission of the mortgagor he has the right  of recourse on the mortgagor for compensation or he may obtain compensation in terms  of an equivalent  period  of benefiting from the mortgaged assets. The mortgagee  should bear all the expenses  relating  to safekeeping,  documentation and  selling of the mortgaged asset, except when the two parties agree that the mortgagor should bear such expenses.

3/2/11  With due consideration to item (5), it is permissible to mortgage debt, whether  such debt is owed by the mortgagee  or anyone else.

3/2/12 Possession  of a mortgaged  debt takes place by possession  of the debt's document or by attestation  of the  debt at the time of its mortgaging.  When  a debt is mortgaged,  the mortgagee becomes more entitled to it than  anyone else.
3/3  Rulings relating to the debt for which the mortgage is signed

3/3/1 The debt for which  the mortgage  is signed  should  be a per• missible debt such as sale income,  guarantee  against damage, Salam commodity, lstisna'a commodity or an owed usufruct. Concluding a valid mortgage  contract  need not necessarily be preceded by establishing the debt. The mortgage contract can be signed before or at the same time of signing the debt con• tract. The debt for which the mortgage  is signed should not be a impermissible debt (such as a usurious  loan); or a non-debt deal (such as a specific price, the usufruct of a specific asset, and  a spot  sale commodity that  is still in  the  hands  of the seller).

3/3/2  It is impermissible to stipulate mortgage as a condition in trust• based contracts such as agency, deposit, Musharakah, Mudara• bah  and leasing contracts.  If mortgage in such contracts  is to be confined  to indemnity  in case of transgression,  negligence or breach of the  contract,  then  it is permissible.  [see  Shari'ah Standard No. (5) on Guarantees, item 2/2/1]



972





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage and Its Contemporary Applications

3/4 Execution of the mortgage

3/4/1 With due consideration to item 3/1/4, the mortgagee has the right to claim the sale ofthe mortgaged asset in case of default After repayment of the mortgagee's debt the remaining value of the  mortgaged  asset should be given to the  mortgagor by virtue of the mortgage contract  If the sale value of the mortgaged asset happened to be less than the due debt, the difference shall be subject to Shari'ah rulings on normal debt, and the mortgagee should have the right of recourse on the mortgagor for settlement of such difference.

3/4/2 The mortgagee does not have the right to stipulate a condition that he should own the asset in case of default Nevertheless, there  is no prohibition  for the mortgagee to purchase the mortgaged asset from the mortgagor at market value, and take the portion of the value to which he is entitled.

3/5/3 When the mortgagor is bankrupt, the mortgagee should have the priority  over other  debtors, for getting his  debt repaid from the sale value of the mortgaged asset  If the sale value of the mortgaged asset is less than the mortgagee's debt, he becomes in the same standing with other debtors with regard to the excess indebtedness.

4. Mortgage of Financial Papers and Sukuk.

4/1  It is permissible to mortgage the financial papers and Sukuk which can be issued and transacted according to Shari'ah, such as Islamic Sukuk  and shares of Islamic financial Institutions.  The shares  of the companies whose original activities are permissible can also be added to this category. [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (21) on Financial Paper: Shares and Bonds, item 3/4]

4/2 It is permissible to mortgage usufruct-based Sukuk which represent common shares in the usufructs  of specific assets, or assets in the form of a specific indebtedness.  This should be taken with due consideration to Sharf'ah Standard No. (17) on Investment Sukuk, item 5/1/5/2.



973





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications

4/3  It is impermissible  to mortgage  the financial papers  and Su.kuk that should  not  be issued  or transacted   according  to Shari'ah, such  as interest-based bonds, preference  shares and  enjoyment  shares  [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (21) on Financial  Paper: Shares and Bonds, items  2/6 and  2/7].  Such financial  papers  include  also traditional investment  certificates, certificates oftraditional investment deposits and  shares  of the  companies  that  pursue  impermissible  activities like manufacturing of alcohols, swine trade and dealing in Riha [see Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (21) on Financial  Paper:  Shares and Bonds, item 2/1  and  Shari'ah Standard No. (14) on Documentary Credit, items 3/4/1 and 3/4/2]. Among these financial papers also are shares of traditional  financial  Institutions,  shares  of traditional financial companies,  shares of traditional insurance  companies and shares of companies  which originally pursue  permissible  activities, yet Riha• based and other prohibited  dealings constitute  a predominant part of their activities.

5. Mortgage of Current Accounts and Cash Securities

When a current account is mortgaged for the benefit of the same institu• tion with which it is opened, the institution  should not use the account unless an agreement  is reached between  the two parties to transfer  the account to an investment account, and thus, make it subject to the rulings on Mudarabah  instead of the rulings on loan. This is so because the in• stitution, as a mortgagee, has to avoid making free of charge benefit from the mortgaged account On transference of the account to an investment account, the  account holder  becomes entitled  to his profit share as the owner of the capital (Rab al-Mal), while the institution  becomes entitled to its profit share as the worker (Mudarib).

6. Mortgage of Investment  Units and Investment  Accounts

6/1  The Institution  can accept mortgage in the form of investment units in Islamic investment funds. In this case the Institution as a mortgagee can suspend the right ofthe client to get back or draw from the account, absolutely or in proportion  to the amount  of the debt, whichever is more suitable.



974





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications

6/2 The income  and growth earned  by the units or the account  are considered to be mortgaged  along with the principal. This should hold true whether  the contractual  relationship between the client and the Institution or the fund is Mudarabah or investment agency, unless the two parties agree on other arrangement.

7. Mortgage of What Will Be Owned

It is permissible to mortgage an income which is still to be owned if the principal (income earning asset) is specified. The contract in this case is valid whether such income is to be mortgaged along with the principal or independently.

8. Insurance of the Mortgaged Asset

The mortgagee has the right at the time ofsigning the contract to request from the mortgagor  to arrange  Islamic insurance  for the mortgaged asset whenever it is possible. When the mortgagor accepts to do so the compensation to be received on the damage of the mortgaged asset shall replace it. If the compensation is received in the form of a cash amount such amount shall be mortgaged along with its returns by depositing it in a frozen investment account owned by the mortgagor. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (5) on Guarantees, item 4/8]

9. Zakah on the Mortgaged Asset

9/1  The owner of the mortgaged asset should pay Zak.ah if it is payable on the asset and its income or on its income only. The fact that the owner cannot dispose of the mortgaged asset does not relief him from payment of Zakah.

9/2 Zakah is payable on all cash mortgages such as current accounts, cash securities, units of investment  funds, frozen investment accounts, Sukuk, Salam debts, and Istisna'a debts, subject to stipulations  of Shari'ah Standard No. (35) on Zak.ah, items 5/1, 5/2 and 5/3.

10. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 17 Rabi' I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 15
March 2009 A.D.



975





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications





Adoption of the Standard


The Sharf'ah Board adopted the standard on Mortgage and its Contemporary Applications in its meeting No. (23) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on Thursday - Saturday 15-17 Rabi' I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 12-15 March 2009 A.D.











































976





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In  its  meeting   No.   (16)  held  in  Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah  on
7-12  Jumada I,  1427  A.H.,  corresponding to  3-8  June 2006  A.D., the Sharf'ah Board  decided  to issue a Shari'ah standard on Mortgage and Its Contemporary Applications.

On  12 Rajah  1427 A.H.,  corresponding  to  6 August 2005  A.D., the Secretariat General decided to commission  a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a study on Mortgage and Its Contemporary Applications.

A joint  committee  composed  from Shari'ah Standards  Committees  (1)
and  (2) held  a meeting  in the Kingdom  of Bahrain,  on 24 Rabi' II,  1428
A.H., corresponding to  11 May 2007 A.D., the joint  committee  discussed the study, and asked the consultant  to introduce necessary  changes in the light of the discussions and observations  of the meeting.
In a further  meeting  of the joint  committee, held in the State of Kuwait on 21 Jumada I, 1428 A.H., corresponding to 7 June 2007 A.D., the draft of the standard was discussed and necessary amendments were introduced in the light of the discussions and observations  of the meeting.
In its  meeting No.  (22)  held  in  the  Kingdom  of Bahrain,  on  28-30
Dhul-Qa'dah 1430 A.H., corresponding to 26-28 November  2008 A.D., the Shari'ah  Board discussed  the amendments made  by the joint meetings  of the Shari'ah Standards Committees  (1) and (2) and introduced the changes which it deemed necessary.

The Secretarial General of AAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 24 Safar 1430 A.H., corresponding  to 19 February 2009 A.D. More than  30 participants  attended the session as representatives of central



977





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications

banks, institutions, and accounting firms. The session was also attended by Shari'ah scholars, university teachers and other interested parties. Several observations were made  in the  session,  and  duly responded  to by the members ofthe Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2).

In its meeting No.  (23) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain,  on Thursday
- Saturday 15-17 Rabi' I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 12-15 March 2009
A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the amendments introduced by the public hearing, introduced the changes that it deemed necessary and adopted the standard.










































978





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage and Its Contemporary Applications





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Shari'ah Rulings on Mortgage (item 3)
•  Mortgage  is permissible  when  the  debt  transaction   takes  place  while the two parties  are on travel because Allah, the Almighty,  says:  {"I And if you  are on a journey  and cannot find a scribe,  then let  there be apledge taken (mortgaging)...}• Mortgage is also permissible when the contracting  parties  are not on travel,  because Anas is reported  to have said:  "The Prophet (peace be upon Him) mortgaged his armor plate to a Jew in Al-Madinah  and took some barleyfrom him to hisfamily".  In this regard Ibn Al-Mundhir said: "I do not know anyone, except Mujahid, who held a different interpretation for the Verse: {"..ifyou are on ajourney ...etc}. Traveling  (adds Ibn Al-Mundhir)  is referred to in the Verse as the pre• dominant  case where mortgage  is needed, since traveling parties would most probably be in lack of a scribe. Hence the verse, although it mentions traveling, it does not stipulate it as a condition  for concluding mortgage contracts. Mortgage is also not obligatory, a fact which - to my knowledge
- has encountered  no dispute. The emphasis on mortgage in the Verse in•
dicates guidance rather than obligation, because Allah, the Almighty, says:
{"and ifone ofyou deposits a thing on trust with another}.
•  According  to  the  Hanbali, Hanafiand  Shafi'i  scholars  mortgage  is valid and binding  when it is stipulated as a condition  in a sale contract. The Hanbali"° scholars believe that it is one of the conditions  that serve

(2) [Al-Baqarah (The Cow): 283].
(3) Muhammad Ibn Abdul-Wahhab, "Mukhtasar AI-Insaf Wa AI-Sharh Al-Kabir"  [1: 506], Matabi' Al-Riyadh, Riyadh, First Edition, Abdul-Aziz lbn Zayd Al-Rumi et al (eds.).
Electronic Copy, Al-Jami' Al-Kabir Program.
(4) Ala' AI-Din (AI-Mardawi), "Al-Insaf, op. cit, [11: 206-207].
(5) Ala' AI-Din AI-Samarqandi, "Tuhfat Al-Fuqaha"", op. cit, [2: 70].
(6) Ministry ofAwqaf - Kuwait, "AI-Mawsuah Al-Fiqhiyyah", the letter Ba, Bay' Wa Shurut, item 28.



979





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications

the  interest  of the  contract,  whereas the  Hanafi  scholars consider  it as one of the conditions that suit and conform to the contract, since it entails contract  documentation•    In  elaborating their  standpoint  the Hanafi scholars indicate:  "In Shari'ah,  mortgage as well as price surety• ship  serve the purpose of debt documentation.  Stipulating mortgage as a condition in the contract is just like stipulating a condition that relates to quality of the price, hence it is an explicit condition for what the contract implicitly aims at!° Mortgage is one of the conditions needed when the deal is to be concluded with someone who insists on them. If a condition ofthis type is not fulfilled the concerned party will have the right ofoption. One of the cases that justify having the right of option, according to the Hanafi scholars, is "Refraining from honoring a valid condition like the mortgage condition or suretyship for an outstanding debt.(9
■    Keeping the mortgaged asset in the hands of a notary is permissible. Ac•
cording to the Shafi'i scholars it is permissible "because the right belongs to the two parties, so they can agree on that".(0
■    According to the Hanbali School when the seller stipulates a condition that he shall keep the sold object until he receives the price, his condition is considered to be valid and observable. To the Hanbali scholars, such type of condition is neither part of the contract's necessities nor does it serve the contract's interest, yet it does not run counter to the contract's objectives. Nonetheless, such condition  (as  perceived by the Hanbali scholars) entails some benefit for the seller or the buyer.
■    The seller does not have the right to stipulate a condition that he shall re• tain the ownership ofthe sold commodity until he receives the price which is deferred for a certain period. The seller does not have such right be•

(7) Mustafa Ahmad Al-Zarqa, "AI-Madkhal Al-Fiqhi AI-'Am", published  1968,  [1: 477-478]. (8) Ala'  AI-Din AI-Samar qandi,  "Tuhfat AL-Fuqaha"", op.        [2: 70].
(9) Muhammad   Al-Hajjar,   "Fath  Al-'Allam Bi-Sharh Murshid Al-Anam  Fi  AL-Fiqh  'Ala
Madhab Al-Sadah Al-Shafi'yyah" [5:  19], Dar Ibn Hazm , Beirut, First Edition, 1418 A.H. (10) Ibrahim  Ibn Ali Ibn Yusuf AI-Shirazi Abu Ishaq,  "AL-Muhadhdhab Fi Fiqh Al-Imam Al-Shaff'ir [1: 310], Dar Al-Fikr, Beirut. Electronic copy: Al-Jami' AI-Kabir Program.
(11) Minis try ofAwqaf - Kuwait, "AI-Mawswah Al-Fiqhiyyah", the letter Ba, Bay' Wa Shurut,
item 28.
(12) Mini stry of Awqaf - Kuwait,  "AI-Mawswah Al-Fiqhiyyah", the letter Ba, Bay, "Ahkam
Mushtarakah Bayn Al-Mabi' Wa Al-Thaman", item 60/D.



980





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage and Its Contemporary Ap plications

cause he has willingly relinquished his right in spot payment of the price; therefore, he has no right to cancel the right of the other party  (to get the sold commodity). This viewpoint is adopted by the Hanbali School.0
Rulings Relating to the Mortgaged Asset (item 3/2)
•  The mortgaged asset should be a Sharf'ah-permissible property because the underlying  objective is to sell this asset for settlement of the debt in case of default. Therefore if the mortgaged asset is an impermissible pro• perty of the mortgagor, it cannot be sold. In this regard the Hanafi scho• lars indicate that "Mortgage is for settlement ofdebt, and a Muslim cannot repay debts or get debts repaid to him in terms of Sharf'ah-banned objects
such as alcohol and swine. In "Al-Insaf" the Hanbali viewpoint is indi•
cated as follows: "It is permissible to mortgage any asset that can be sold.00
•  The mortgaged asset can be a debt,a cash amount,    a common pro•

(13) Ala' Al-Din AI-Samarqandi, "Tuhfat AL-Fuqaha', op. cit, [2: 56]. (14) Ala' Al-Din (AI-Mardawi), "AL-Insaf, op. cit, [11: 491]
(15) Ala' Al-Din AI-Samarqandi, "Tuhfat AL-Fuqaha, op. cit, [3: 53-54]
(16) Muhammad Ibn Abdul-Wahhab, "Mukhtasar AL-Insaf Wa AI-Sharh AL-Kabir" [1: 511], Al-Riyadh Press, Riyadh, First Edition, Abdul-Aziz Ibn Zayd AI-Rumi et al (eds.).
{17)  In "Al-Insaf" Mortgage is defined as "documentation of a debt by an asset so that the debt can be repaid from the sale value ofthe asset when repayment from other sources is not possible". AI-Zarkashi said: "Mortgage is documentation of a debt by an asset or a debt'. This viewpoint of Al-Zarkashi is reported by Ala' AI-Din (Al-Mardawi) in "AL-Insaf" printed with "AL-Muqni"; "Al-Sharh Al-Kabir" and "Al-Insaf [12: 359], Hujar Press, First Edition, 1995.
(18) According to the Shafi'i scholars "It is permissible to lend cash so as to be mortgaged.
When the debt is due, if the debtor made repayment the case is obvious, otherwise
the cash can be used for purchasing the asset required for settlement, or the same cash amount can be paid for settlement of the debt if it is a cash debt', Muhammad Al-Hajjar,  "Fath AI-'Allam", op.  cit, [5:  27]. Permissibility of selling the mortgaged asset and mortgaging its value instead of it has also been indicated by the Hanbali scholars in several cases as when they state that  "It  is  permissible  to mortgage perishable objects for an outstanding debt, so that the sale income ofsuch objects can be mortgaged, Shamsul-Din (Ibn Qudamah), "AI-Sharh AL-Kabir", op. cit, [12: 368]. The Maliki scholars state that "It is impermissible to mortgage dinars, or dirhams or filses, or food stuffs in the form of mixed ingredients or what is measured in terms ofvolume and weight, without imprinting a mark on it so that the mortgagee would not be able to use the mortgaged object and return back a similar one': Abu Abdullah Muhammad Ibn Muhammad (Al-Maghribi), "Mawahib Al-Jalil Li-Sharh Mukhtasar Khalil", Dar Al-Fikr, Second Edition, 1978, [5: 5].



981





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage and Its Contemporary Applications

perty, a borrowed asset or a rented asset.
■    The mortgage is a trust in the hands of the mortgagee and is owned by the mortgagor. The mortgagor should bear all the expenses relating to maintenance  of the proper  state of the mortgage object including all necessary outlays such as feeding, clothing, safekeeping, veterinary ser• vices and the likes.  In this  regard, the Prophet (peace be upon him) is

(19)  The Shafiee  scholars emphasized permissibility of mortgaging the asset that can permissibly be sold (even if common property,  that can be sold), Muhammad Al• Hajjar, "Fath AI-'Allam", op. cit, [5: 25]. The Hanafi scholars emphasize prohibition of mortgaging "common property........, because delivery cannot take place", Ala' Al-Din AI-Samarqandi, "Tuhfat Al-Fuqaha, op. cit, [3: 54]. It has been stated in "AI-Sharh AL• Kabir": "Mortgage ofcommon property is permissible as emphasized  by Ibn Abu Layla, AI-Nakh'i, Malik, Al-Awza'i, Al-Aniri, AI-Shfiee and Abu Thur. According to Ashab AI-Ra'y, it is impermissible except when a partner mortgage his share to his counter partner, or the two partners together mortgage their common property to one person, or one person mortgages his asset to two person so that they can possess it together': Shamsul-Deen (Ibn Qudamah), "AI-Sharh Al-Kabir", op. cit, [12: 369-370].
(20) Ibn Al-Mundhir said:  All our precedent scholars from whom we learnt unanimously agreed that when someone borrows an object from someone else so as to mortgage it for obtaining a specific amount of money from a specific person for a specific period, his act is permissible. Ibn Al-Mundhir has also reported a unanimous agreement among Fiqh scholars that if the person (in the preceding example) borrowed the object according to the above stated conditions, but he mortgaged  something  else, his act is impermissible. If such person mortgaged the borrowed object for a debt amount that exceeds what he had stated when borrowing the object, the mortgage becomes null and void either for the whole amount of the debt as emphasized by Al-Shafiee, or for the excess part only, on the basis of deal fragmentation. According to Al-Qadhi when the object to be mortgaged is borrowed without restrictions,  the process of borrowing is  permissible and the borrower can mortgage the borrowed object for any amount. This viewpoint is one oftwo viewpoints supported by AI-Shafi'i. The other viewpoint emphasized by AI-Shafiee is that mortgage of a borrowed asset is impermissible without knowledge of the amount, nature and maturity ofthe debt to be mortgaged for. When the borrowed mortgage asset perishes the guarantee resets with the mortgagor, since a borrowed property has to be guaranteed by the borrower. There is also the case when the person from whom the mortgaged asset is borrowed releases the mortgaged asset without resorting to the mortgagor, and whether he should resort to the mortgagor in this case or not. Fiqh scholars are divided between two standpoints concerning this issue, as they do with regard to the case of someone who repays the debt of someone else without his permission, Shamsul-Deen (Ibn Qudamah), "AL-Sharh AL-Kabir", [5: 148]. Electronic copy: Al-Jammf' Al-Kabir Program. As indicated in "Al-Insaf,  It is permissible to borrow or rent something so as to mortgage it,  on permission of the owner in both cases", Ala' AI-Din (Al-Mardawi), "Al-Insaf", op. cit, [5:
148-149]. Electronic copy: Al-Jami' Al-Kabir Program.



982





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage and Its Contemporary Applications

reported  to have said:  "The one who mortgages  the asset should get its benefits and bear its expenses." Since the mortgaged asset belongs to the mortgagor he should, therefore, bear its expenses as if it is still in his hands." According to the Hanafi School "expenses of a mortgaged asset are of two types: the first type includes all the expenses which relate to maintenance of the proper state of the asset and its preservation against decay, and such expenses should be borne by the mortgagor. The second type comprises expenses such as those relating to safekeeping ofthe asset, or returning it back to mortgagor, or returning back part of it which has been damaged by an accident;  and such expenses have to be borne by the mortgagee. Furthermore, the Hanafi scholars indicate: "When the mortgagee without the permission of the competent authority bears the expenses that should have been borne by the mortgagor, he is considered to have done so in donation, whereas when he does so on permission of the competent authority he has the right of recourse on the mortgagor for repayment. Similarly, the mortgagor is considered as a donor when he bears the expenses that should have been borne by the mortgagee wi• thout the permission  of the concerned authority, and should have the right ofrecourse on the mortgagee when he does so, on permission ofthe competent authority".0
•  The mortgagee does not have the right to make free of charge benefit from the mortgaged asset, because otherwise he will be committing Riha.
Rulings Relating to the Debt for Which the Mortgage Is Signed (item 3/3)

■    The mortgage contract can be signed before, along with or after the debt contract. In this regard the Hanbali scholars indicate that "signing of the mortgage contract can be visualized in terms of three cases: it can take place after signing of the debt contract and in this case it is permissible as per the unanimous viewpoint ofFiqh scholars, because the debt is already

(21) Abdullah Ibn Qudamah Al-Maqdisi Abu Muhammad, "AI-Kaf Fi Fiqh Al-Imam Al• Mubajjal Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal", AI-Maktab Al-Islami  - Beirut, [2:  146].  Electronic copy: Al-Jami' AI-Kabir Program.
(22) Ala'  Al-Din Al-Samarqandi, "Tuhfat  Al-Fuqaha,  Ihya'  A-Turath  Al-Islami •
Qatar,  [3: 59-61].



983





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage and Its Contemporary Applications

there and it needs documentation. The second case is when the mortgaged contract  is signed at the same time of signing the debt contract, as when
- for instance  - one party says to the other:  I sell to you this garment  of
mine for ten dinars payable after a month  provided that you mortgage to me your  slave Saad, and the other  party  responses: I agree to that The mortgage  contract  in this second case is also valid, according to Al-Sha• f'i and Ashab Al-Ra'y, because it is needed. The third  case is when the mortgage  contract  is signed before the debt contract,  as when  - for ins• tance - one party  says to the other:  I mortgage this slave of mine to you against lending me ten dinars. In this third  case the mortgage  contract is invalid according to the prevailing view point ofthe Hanbali School, while AI-Shafi'i considers  it to be valid.  The proponents  of the validity of the contract  in this case include also Abu Al-Khattab, Malik and Abu Hani• fah. It is argued that the mortgage contract in this case is a documentation of a valid right and therefore it can precede it, similar to the case of gua• rantee. A further justification  given by Fiqh scholars in this connection  is that the mortgage contract in this case is signed for something which will take place in the future,  and therefore  it is similar to a darak  guarantee (guarantee against occurrence  of third party claim on the asset).3
Execution of the Mortgage (item 3/4)
•  Foreclosure: According  to  Hadith:  "Mortgage should not be foreclosed from its owner who should get its benefit and bear its expenses".  The mea• ning  of this  Hadith  is that  the  failure  of the  mortgagor  to redeem  his
mortgaged  asset does not make the mortgagee entitled to that asset. This was, in fact, the practice during the Pre-Islamic period  (Jahiliyyah) when the mortgagee used to seize the mortgaged  asset in case of default.
Contemporary Applications  of Mortgage
•  Holding  the  documents which  represent the  ownership of the  goods as a mortgage  is permissible,  because  possession  of the  documents is

(23) Muwaffaq Al-Din (Ibn Qudamah), "Al-Mughni"', op. cit, [6: 444445]. Darakguarantee is a "Guarantee given to the purchaser against the case when the purchased asset turns out to be owned by a third party. See: Muhammad Al-Hajjar, "Fath AI-'Allam", op. cit, [5: 44].
(24) Mohammad Al-Hajjar, "Fath AI-'Allam", op. cit, [5: 25].



984





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage and Its Contemporary Applications

considered as possession of the goods themselves. The possessor of the documents will become authorized to dispose ofthe goods like an owner.
■    It is permissible to mortgage shares because shares represent a common
share  of Shari'ah-permissible  assets  (cash,  tangible  assets,  usufructs, rights and debts - item 3/1  of Shari'ah Standard on Financial Papers). As shown in item (7) above, some ofthe Fiqh scholars indicate that mortga• ging of common property is permissible.
■    It is permissible to mortgage Sukukbecause, similar to shares, they repre•
sent common shares in Sharf'ah-permissible assets (cash, debts, usufructs, tangible assets). The only difference between shares and Sukuk is that Sukuk can be a common share of only one type of these assets (cash, or debts or usufructs or tangible assets), [see Sharf'ah Standard on Invest• ment Sukuk]. As we have seen previously Fiqh scholars indicate that it is permissible to mortgage common property as well as cash, tangible assets and debts. Although there is no Shari'ah or Fiqh text that permits or prohibits mortgaging of usufructs, yet I can see no Shari'ah restriction against it, if such usufructs are Sharf'ah-acceptable and their mortgaging could achieve the Sharf'ah objective of "Preservation of rights and docu• mentation of debts, through sale of the mortgaged asset and repayment of the debt in case of default': Achievement of such objective appears to be possible through mortgaging of the Sukuk issued against usufructs of assets (in hand and with debtors). [see Shari'ah Standard on Investment Sukuk, 5/1/5/2]
■    Permissibility offreezing the balances of current accounts and the like as mortgages is based on the fact that this is similar to mortgaging of assets which are previously held under the guarantee of the mortgagee (assets in the hands ofthe mortgagee), which is permissible.

(25) According to the majority ofFiqh scholars (except the Shafi'i School) the account in this case becomes kept bythe institution ontrust basis, ratherthan on guarantee basis. As can be understood from what has been stated by Imam Ahmad, the mortgage becomes binding once the contract is signed The Hanbali scholars elaborate on this issue by stating: "When someone mortgages an asset which is already in the hands of the mortgagee, whether  the mortgagee has obtained such asset through borrowing, on trust basis, or forcibly ... etc, the mortgage is valid, because the asset is owned by
the mortgagor and can be possessed, hence, it can be mortgaged, as ifit is in =



985





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage and Its Contemporary Ap plications

■    It is permissible for the Institution  to retain  investment  accounts and in• vestment  units  as mortgage  because this  is considered  as mortgaging  of common property  which is permissible as has been indicted earlier in this standard. Permissibility of such mortgages can also be based on the fact that an investment  account or unit usually comprises cash, or assets, or debts, or most often a mixture of all that. As we have seen earlier mortgaging  of any of these items is permissible. Furthermore,  mortgaging  of investment accounts and units can be seen as similar to mortgages that comprise a for• givable degree of gharar, due to the changing nature of real assets as a com-

= the hands of the owner. Therefore what can be understood from this statement by Imam Ahmad is that the mortgage here becomes binding by virtue of the same contract with no need for any further act (i.e., what changes is the ruling only). According to Al-Qadi and his companions  as well as AI-Shafi'i the mortgage does not become valid without the elapse of sufficient time for possession", Shamsul-Din (Ibn Qudamah),  "AI-Sharh AL-Kabir", op. cit, [12: 406]. The author of "Al-Insaf" has also discussed this issue and added mortgaging  of an asset held by the mortgagee on the basis of a nullified contract (Ala'  Al-Din Al-Mardawi, Electronic copy: Al• Jami' Al-Kabir Program). An  important point  to be noted here is what has been quoted in "Mukhtasar Al-Insaf" and  "Al-Sharh  Al-Kabir"  on the discussion about the status of the mortgagee who is already holding the asset on guarantee  basis. The quoted statement comprises the following: "When someone mortgages an asset which is already seized or borrowed  by the mortgagee, the mortgage is valid and the guarantee of the mortgagee is cancelled according to Malik and Abu Hanifah. AI-Shafiee said that the guarantee should not be cancelled and the mortgage is valid because there is no contradiction  between the two. According to Al-Shafiee even in the mortgage arrangement the mortgagee  is committed  to guarantee in case of transgression. To me, the mortgagee has the right to hold the asset as a mortgage and he is no longer to be seen as a transgressor, yet the assertion that there is no contradiction between holding the asset as a mortgage on the one hand, and holding it through borrowing or seizure on the other, is objectionable, because a borrower or someone who takes the asset by force has to guarantee the asset whereas a mortgagee is supposed to keep the asset on trust basis rather than under guarantee. Moreover, on mortgaging the asset there will remain no reason which justifies continuation of the guarantee. If the mortgagee is to be held responsible later on for transgression against the mortgaged  asset, that will be for his transgression  rather  than for his status as a borrower or someone who has taken the asset by force", Muhammad  Ibn Abdul-Wahhab,  "Mukhtasar Al-Insaf Wa Al-Sharh  AI-Kabir",  [1: 508]  - Electronic copy: Al-Jami' Al-Kabir Program. The  Shafiee scholars  [Muhammad Al-Hajjar, "Fath Al-'Allam", op. cit, [5: 29] indicate: "The mortgaged asset is a trust in the hand of the mortgagee except in eight cases: (I) An extorted asset changed to a mortgage
in the hands of the extorter,      =



986





Shari'ah  Standard No. (39): Mortgage and Its Contemporary Ap plications

ponent of such accounts and units. As we have seen before, such mortgages are permissible according to the Maliki scholars who argue that "since the mortgagee  has the right to lend his money without  documentation,  it is only logical that he can accept documentation with some Gharar. In the fi• nal analysis something is better than nothing?Moreover, it can be argued that the unknown aspects ofthe transaction  are later on going to be known.
Contemporary Applications of Debt Mortgaging
•  It is permissible  to issue documentary credit for a client on guarantee  of a debt  owed to this  client by a third  party,  and documented by a letter of credit, a guarantee, a receipt, a commercial  paper,  a bond,  or Islamic Sukuk, because it is permissible  to mortgage  debt as we have seen earlier.
■    It is permissible  to issue documentary credit to a client against another
documentary credit  (Back-to-back credit  and  transferable   credit),  be•

(II) A mortgaged asset changed to an extorted asset, {ill) A borrowed asset changed to a mortgage, (IV)  An asset offered for sale changed to a mortgage,  (V) An asset sold through a false contract changed to a mortgage, (VI) A sold asset changed to a mortgage after termination  of the contract by the buyer,  and (VII) An  amount payable by the husband  on divorce changed to a mortgage before being received by the wife.  The justification for guarantee in these cases is the presence of the reason  which  necessitates it.  That  is to  say relaxation  of guarantee  because of mortgage is overruled by a Shari'ah requisite for guarantee because of borrowing or seizure; contrary to the case of on-trust deposit (Wadi'ah) where there is a Shari'ah prohibition against guarantee. Regarding the same issue of mortgaging an asset that is already in the hands of the mortgagee, the following has also been stated by Fiqh scholars "when the mortgaged asset is already in the hands ofthe mortgagee such as a borrowed or an extorted asset, the mortgage is valid and the guarantee is cancelled according to Malik and Abu Hanifah. AI-Shafiee argues that the guarantee should not be cancelled and the mortgage is valid because there is no contradiction between the two. According to Al-Shafi'i even in the mortgage arrangement the mortgagee is committed  to guarantee in case of transgression, and therefore the mortgage is valid along with the guarantee?'; Shamsul-Din (Ibn Qudamah),  "AI-Sharh Al-Kabir", op. Cit, [12: 407]. Ibn Qudamah then discussed the proposition  advocated by Al• Shafi'i that there is no contradiction between holding the asset as a mortgage on the one hand, or holding it through borrowing or seizure on the other. lbn Qudamah emphasized that a borrower or someone who takes the asset by force has to guarantee the asset whereas a mortgagee is supposed to keep the asset on trust basis rather than under  guarantee.  See:  "Al-Mawsuah Al-Fiqhiyyah Al-Kuwaytiyyah",  the term Al-Rahn, item (9).
(26) See:  "Al-Mawsuwah AL-Fiqhiyyah AL-Kuwaytiyyah", the term Al-Rahn, item (9).



987





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications

cause a documentary credit results in a debt owed by the bank to the client, and such debt can be mortgaged for obtaining a new debt.
Insurance of the Mortgaged Asset
■    Insurance of the mortgaged asset is permissible because if such asset is  damaged the compensation  received can be used for replacing the mortgage; and thus continuation of the vital role of mortgage in preser• vation of rights,  documentation  of debts and facilitation of debt repay• ment and collection is ensured.












































988


















