Shari'ah Standard No. (30)



Monetization (Tawarruq)












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                             757
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................        758

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               758
2. Definition of Monetization and Its Distinction from Bay' Al-'Inah..        758
3. Mutawarriq (Monetization Beneficiary)                                                   758
4. Controls on Monetization Transactions................................................       758
5. Controls on Monetization When the Institution Is the Beneficiary..       760
6. Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................       760
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        761
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        762
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard....................................        764



























755








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


The purpose of this standard is to indicate the essence of Monetization and explain the Shari'ah conditions for its validity, as well as the controls pertaining to its application in Islamic financial Institutions (Institution/ Institutions).































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



757





S h ari 'ah  S tan d ar d N o .  ( 3 0 ) : M o n e tiza ti o n  ( T a w ar ru q)





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers the different applications ofmonetization, whether the beneficiary is the customer or the institution.

2. Definition of Monetization  and Its Distinction from Bay' Al-'Inah

Monetization refers to the process of purchasing a commodity for a de• ferred price determined through Musawamah (Bargaining) or Murabahah (Mark-up Sale), and selling it to a third party for a spot price so as to obtain cash.

Whereas 'Inah refers to the process of purchasing  the commodity  for a deferred price, and selling it for a lower spot price to the same party from whom the commodity was purchased.

3. Mutawarriq (Monetization Beneficiary)

3/1  The Monetization  beneficiary may be a customer  who purchases the commodity  from the Institution  and sells it to a third party to obtain liquidity. It may also be the Institution itselfwhen it purchases the commodity  from the customer or another Institution  and sells it to a third party to obtain liquidity. The controls for both cases are shown in items (4) and (5) below.

3/2  The institution  should not  perform  Monetization  for the benefit of conventional banks when it discovers that such banks are going to use the liquidity for interest-based lending instead of Shari'ah• compliant operations.

4. Controls on Monetization  Transactions

4/1  The requirements of the contract for purchasing the commodity on deferred payment bases should be fulfilled, for both Musawamah and Murabahah transactions, with due consideration to Shari'ah Standard



758





S h ari 'ah  S tan d ar d N o .  ( 3 0 ) : M o n e tiza ti o n  ( T a w ar ru q)

No. (8)  on Murabahah.  There shall also be a real commodity that the seller owns before selling it. If the process is to involve a binding promise, it shall be from only one party. As regards the commodity sold, it shall not be gold or silver or any type of currency.

4/2 The commodity sold shall be well identified so as to become distinct from the other assets of the seller.  This may be done by separating the commodity from the other assets of the seller, or recording the numbers  of its identifying documents  such as storing certificates. [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (20) on Sale ofCommodities in Organized Markets, item 4/2/2]

4/3 If the commodity  is not made available at the time of signing the contract,  the client shall be given a full description  or a sample that indicates the quantity of the commodity  and the place of its storage, so that his act of purchasing the commodity becomes real rather  than  fictitious. In this sense, using local commodities  for Monetization is more preferable.

4/4 The commodity shall be actually or constructively received by the buyer, and there remains  no further  condition  or procedure  for receiving it.

4/5 The commodity  (object of Monetization)  must be sold to a party other than the one from whom it was purchased on deferred payment basis (third party), so as to avoid 'Inah which is strictly prohibited. Moreover, the  commodity  shall not  return  back to the  seller by virtue of prior agreement or collusion between the two parties, or according to tradition.

4/6 The contract for purchasing the commodity on deferred payment basis, and the contract for selling it for a spot price shall not be linked together in such a way that the client looses his right to receive the commodity. Such linking ofthe two contracts is prohibited whether it is made through stipulation in the documents, acceptance as a normal tradition, or incorporation in the procedures.



759





S h ari 'ah  S tan d ar d N o .  ( 3 0 ) : M o n e tiza ti o n  ( T a w ar ru q)

4/7 The client shall not delegate the Institution or its agent to sell, on his behalf, a commodity that he purchased from the same Institution and, similarly, the Institution shall not accept such delegation. If, however, the regulations do not permit the client to sell the commodity except through the same Institution, he may delegate the Institution to do so after he, actually or constructively, receives the commodity.

4/8 The Institution should not arrange proxy of a third party to sell, on behalf of the client, the commodity that the client purchased from the Institution.

4/9 The client shall not sell the commodity except by himself or through an agent other than the Institution, and shall duly observe the other stipulations.

4/10  The Institution shall provide the client with the information that he or his appointed agent may need for selling the commodity.

5. Controls on Monetization When the Institution Is the Beneficiary

5/1  Monetization is not a mode of investment or financing. It has been permitted when there is a need for it, subject to specific terms and conditions.  Therefore, the Institutions  shall not use Monetization as a means of mobilizing liquidity for their operations,  and exert no effort for fund mobilization through other modes such as Mudarabah, investment agency, Sukuk, investments funds, and the like. The Institution shall resort to monetization  only when it faces the danger of a liquidity shortage that could interrupt the flow ofits operations and cause losses for its clients.

5/2 The  institutions   shall  avoid  proxy  in  selling the  Monetization commodity, even if proxy is to be arranged with a third  party. In other words, Institutions  shall use their own bodies for selling the monetization  commodity, though using brokers for this purpose is permissible.

6. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued 1 Dhul-Qa'dah 1427 A.H., corresponding to 13
November 2006 A.D.



760





S h ari 'ah  S tan d ar d N o .  ( 3 0 ) : M o n e tiza ti o n  ( T a w ar ru q)





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah  standard  on Monetization was adopted by the Shari'ah
Board in its meeting No.  (17) held in Makkah Al Mukarramah  on 26
Shawwal - 1  Dhal-Qa'dah 1427 A.H., corresponding to 18-23 November
2006A.D.











































761





S h ari 'ah  S tan d ar d N o .  ( 3 0 ) : M o n e tiza ti o n  ( T a w ar ru q)





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


The Sharf'ah Board decided in its meeting No. (7) held on 9-13 Ramadan
1422 A.H., corresponding to 24-28 November 2001 A.D., in Makkah Al Mukarramah, to issue a Shari'ah Standard on Monetization, as practiced by banks.

On  17  Sha'ban  1423 A.H., corresponding  to  3  October  2005 A.D., the Sharf'ah Standards Committee (2) decided to commission a Sharfah consultant to prepare an exposure draft on Monetization.

On 6 Rabi' I,  1426 A.H.,  corresponding to  15  April 2005 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee (2) decided to commission another Sharf'ah consultant to redraft the Monetization Standard in the typical format of the other Shari'ah Standards.

The Committee (2) discussed the exposure draft in its meeting No. (15) held in Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain on 8  Jumada I,  1426 A.H., corresponding to 15 June 2005 A.D., and introduced necessary changes in the light of the comments and observations of the members.

A joint committee comprising members from Sharf'ah Standards Com• mittees (1) and (2) discussed the exposure draft in a meeting held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 1  Safar 1427 A.H., corresponding to 1 March 2006
A.D., and introduced further changes in the light of the comments and observations of its members.

In its meeting No.  (16) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah on 7-12
Jumada I, 1427 A.H.,  corresponding to 3-8 June 2006 A.O., the Shari'ah Board discussed the amendments suggested by the joint meeting ofthe two Sharf'ah Committees and accepted what it deemed appropriate.



762





S h ari 'ah  S tan d ar d N o .  ( 3 0 ) : M o n e tiza ti o n  ( T a w ar ru q)

AAOIFI then held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 6
Rajah 1427 A.H., corresponding to 31 July 2006 A.D. The public hearing was attended by more than  30 participants representing  central banks, Institutions, accounting firms, Shari'ah scholars, university teachers and other  interested parties.  Several  observations were made in the public hearing to which the members of the Sharf'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) duly responded.

In its meeting No. (17) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 26 Shawwal
- 1  Dhul-Qa'dah 1427 A.H., corresponding to 18-23 November 2006 A.D., the Shari'ah  Board discussed the changes proposed by the participants in the public hearing, accepted some of them, and adopted the Standard (unanimously for  some  clauses and  with  the  majority  for others),  as indicated in the minutes of the Board's meetings.




































763





Shari'ah Standard No. (30): Monetization (Tawarruq)





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


■  Differentiation between Monetization and 'Inah with regard to permis• sibility and prohibition stems from the fact that, contrary to the former, the latter is a trick for practicing Riha (usury). 'Inah takes place between two parties who are in fact a borrower and a lender.  The lender sells the commodity  to the borrower for a deferred price and buys it back from him for a less price payable on spot. The majority of the Fuqaha subscribe to prohibition of'Inah and permissibility ofmonetization, ex• cept Ibn Taymiyyah and Ibn Al-Qayyim who consider monetization as prohibited or worthy of aversion.
■  Permissibility of constructive receipt of the commodity has already been catered for in the Sharf'ah Standard No.  (18) on Possession (Qabd)  and the Shari'ah Standard No. (1) on Trading in Currencies.
■  Permissibility ofmonetization transactions that observe the Shari'ah controls indicated in this Standard can be traced in the texts of the Qur'an  and the Sunnah that permit sale transactions.  It has also been confirmed by two resolutions issued by the Islamic Fiqh Academy of the Muslim World League,"and the Standing Committee of the Supreme Board of Shari'ah Scholars of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (Fatwa No. 19297), as well as the Fatwas of several Shari'ah Supervisory Boards. Therefore, monetization is an exit for avoiding Riha rather than a trick for performing it, as it is usual-

(2) Resolution ofthe 15 Session which imposes no condition other than that Monetization should  not be performed like 'Inah.  Also,  the Resolution of the 17  Session which comprises other conditions (well-observed in this standard) most important ofwhich is non-commitment of the bank to become the agent of the client in selling the commodity which "makes Monetization similar to 'Inah" - using the same words ofthe Resolution  • and non-violation of the condition relating to receipt ofthe commodity: (the Resolution here did not impose actual receipt only, similar  to what it did in its 11 Session where it considered legal receipt to be sufficient in currency exchange, which requires more controls than sale transactions).



764





Shari'ah Standard No. (30): Monetization (Tawarruq)

ly practiced by those who do not want to be involved in interest-based bor• rowing. It has been reported  by Abdullah Ibn Al-Mubarakthat 'A 'ishah (may Allah be pleased with her) practiced it.
■  Prohibition of joining together the contract for purchasing the commodity and  the  contract  for selling it is justified  by the  fact that  joining  them together  would impose a commitment  on the client to sell the commodity right  away.  Hence,  such  immediate transfer   of the  ownership of the commodity  may not enable the client to receive it. This is again the same reason for prohibition  of agency-related commitments.
■  Permissibly of resorting  to agency of the Institution  when  the client,  by virtue of law, cannot sell the commodity directly, is meant to safeguard the deal from being nullified by the law.
■  The ruling  that  the  Institution  shall provide  detailed  information  about
the commodity to the client aims at preventing fictitious transactions  and helping the client to obtain liquidity. Such requirement holds true whether the commodity  in question  is a commodity, a car, shares of a company, international goods,  or  local  goods.  The  latter  are  more  suitable  for monetization due to the easiness of ensuring their existence, and the chance available to the client to actually hold them ifhe so desires.
■  The ruling that the Institution shall provide the client with a full description or a sample of the commodity is to ensure that the latter's act of purchasing the commodity is actual rather than fictitious.
■  Monetization  (where  the client or the  Institution  is beneficiary)  shall  be
subjected to strict controls and restrictions  so that  institutions  fulfill the main objectives underlying their presence and the interest of customers to make dealings with them.
■  Principally, institutions  have to show strict  commitment towards  using modes ofinvestment and financing such as the various forms ofMusharakah (Partnership)  and exchange of goods, usufructs and services that conform to the very nature and basic activities of Islamic banking. Hence, imposition

(3) Al-Azhari AI-Shafi'i, "AI-Zahir" (P. 216); and "AL-Fa 'iq Fi Ghrib AL-Hadith" [2: 108]. For permissibility of Monetization see also Al-Mardawi,  "Al-Insaf" [4: 250]; "KashshafAl• Qina" [2: 447]  and [3:  185];  "AL-Maughni" [4:  127]; Al-Sarakhsi, "AL-Mabsut",  [11: 211]; and Al-Nawawi, "Al-Rawdah" [3: 416].



765





S h ari 'ah  S tan d ar d N o .  ( 3 0 ) : M o n e tiza ti o n  ( T a w ar ru q)

of controls and restrictions on monetization would curb any tendency for expanding monetization to the extent that jeopardizes the extensive use  of the  original  modes  of  investment  and  financing.  Therefore, Institutions shall not use monetization except in the limited scope defined in this Standard They shall also restrict the use of monetization to the cases of clients whose transactions cannot be disposed of through other modes of financing and investment such as Musharakah, Mudarabah, ljarah, Istisna'a and the like.  Monetization may also be used as a means for helping the clients to dispose of their previous interest-based debts, after ensuring that they have developed genuine intention not to deal in usurious transactions any more.








































766






















