Shari'ah Standard No. (34)



Hiring of Persons












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                             843
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................        844

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               844
2. Definition of the Term "Hiring of Persons"...............................................       844
3. Pledge to Hire a Service..........................................................................       844
4. Concluding a Contract for Hiring of Persons.......................................       845
5. Subject Matter of Hiring Contract.........................................................       847
6. Guarantees for Provision ofthe Pay and the Service...........................       850
7. Commitments of the Employee and the Employer..............................       851
8. Emergencies, Termination, Expiry and Renewal of Hiring Contracts..       852
9. Date oflssuance of the Standard............................................................        853
Adoption ofthe Standard......................................................................        854
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        855
Appendix (b):  The Sharf'ah Basis for the Standard....................................        857






















841








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions




Preface


This Standard aims to indicate the Shari'ah rulings on hiring of persons in its two distinct forms which include: hiring in the sense of obtaining the services of a private employee (Ajir Khas), as well as hiring in the sense of obtaining the services of a shared employee (Ajir Mushtarak).  The service could also be either a defined task,  or a future service which needs to be specified through detailed terms of reference. The standard also covers the relevant controls that Islamic financial institutions (Institution/Institutions) should observe when the institution is the employee and when it is the employer.























(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



843





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard  covers hiring  of the service/work  of persons between  the institution  and other institutions  or individuals. The standard  covers the cases when  the institution  is the employee and when it is the employer. However, the standard does not cover other contracts such as Mudarabah, investment agency, Musaqat, Muzara'ah, Mugharasah, and Istisna'a.
2. Definition of the Term "Hiring of Persons"

It refers to the contract through which a service/work of a natural or a legal person is obtained against a specific amount  of pay. The service thus ob• tained could be specific or a future one that needs to be specified through detailed terms of reference,  such as educational, health  and consultancy services.
3. Pledge to Hire a Service

3/1  There is no Shari'ah prohibition against having a framework agreement to regulate the process of hiring between the institution and the client. Such  agreement  may comprise the general conditions which govern the  relationship  between  the  two parties,  whereas  there  should  be a separate hiring contract for each operation, signed by both parties. Under such framework agreement the two parties may also perform operations through exchange offer and acceptance with due reference to the general conditions stipulated in the agreement.

3/2 The institution has the right to ask the client who pledges to hire its services to pay a specific amount  to be retained by the institution as a guarantee  for the seriousness  of the client in executing his pledge and  honoring any commitments that  may  result  from  it. In case of withdrawal  from  the part  of the  client the  deduction  from  this guarantee  amount  should not exceed the actual harm  caused to the



844





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

institution. The guarantee amount  can either be kept as a deposit with the institution without being disposed of, or invested on behalf of the client through  Islamic Mudarabah  or investment  agency, or frozen in a current account owned by the client and guaranteed by the institution. The institution  and the client may also agree at the time of signing the contract  to consider the guarantee  amount  as a prepaid installment of the cost payable by the client.  [see Shari'ah Standard No.  (9) on Ijarah and Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek,  item
2/3]

4. Concluding a Contract for Hiring of Persons

4/1 A contract  for hiring  of persons  can take place in any form that normally  indicates  it. It can be concluded  verbally, in writing  or through  modern means of communication.

4/2 The two parties  of the contract  (the employer and the employee) should  be legally competent  (capable of awarding  and accepting agency), otherwise the contract cannot be concluded.

4/3 A private employee, who works for and under  the supervision  of a single employer, has no right to work, at the same time, for anyone else, except on permission of his former employer. Unlike a private employee a shared employee who works for more than one person and who is not supposed to work for a specific person at a specific time, is not subject to such restriction.

4/4 The private employee should be informed about the hiring period and the type of work he is supposed  to do in general, while the shared employee should be informed about the work, its type, and specifications. The specific period within which the work has to be done could also be added, and in that case the employee has to do the work within that specific period. When no specific period  for doing the work is referred to in the contract,  resort  should be to normal practice.

4/5 A private employee is not responsible for damage, unless it is due to his own transgression, negligence, or breach of a stipulated condition.



845





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

4/6  A shared employee is absolutely responsible for damage, unless it is caused by an evitable factor. This, however, does not hold true in the case of an investment agent who is permitted  to utilize the money. Unlike the shared employee who has to guarantee what he is paid to work on, the investment agent does not guarantee, except in case of transgression or negligence.

4/7  The contract for hiring of persons is a binding contract, which none of the two parties can terminate or amend without the consent of the other, except in case of contract breaching, or due to an emergent excuse, or because of inevitable circumstances.

4/8  For a private employee, the beginning of the hiring period should be specified. The hiring period should start at the time of signing the contract, except when the two parties agree on a specific date for its beginning. Hiring in the latter case is known as (deferred hiring), or hiring that has to be executed in the future.

4/9  When a private employee fails to report to work on the date specified in the hiring contract he shall be entitled to no pay for the period between the specified and actual dates of work commencement (the pay for the absence period should be deducted from his total pay). The employer in this case shall have the right to terminate the contract, unless the two parties agree on a compensatory period at the end of the contract period.

4/10 For a shared employee, a certain period for performing the work may be specified. When the shared employee fails to do the work during that period, the employer has the right to terminate the contract or a new period can be agreed upon.

4/11 There is no Shari'ah prohibition for any ofthe two types ofemployees (private and  shared)  to receive 'Arboun  (Earnest  Money)  at the time of signing the contract. If the hiring contract is implemented, the  amount  of earnest  money  should  become  a prepaid  part  of the employee's pay, otherwise the earnest money should go to the employee. However, when the contract is not executed the employee



846





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

is preferably supposed to take from such earnest money  only the portion which compensates the actual harm caused to him.

5. Subject Matter of Hiring Contract

The subject matter ofthe hiring contract is the service/work and the pay.

5/1  Rulings pertaining to the service/work

5/1/1  The service/work of the employee which constitutes a subject matter of the contract should be well known,  accomplishable and permissible in Shari'ah.

5/1/2 It is permissible to determine service in terms of a specific work to be done or a specific period of service, or in terms of both. If the employee is able to do all the work within the specified period, he becomes entitled to the whole pay.  If he is able to do only part of it during the period, his entitlement to the pay will depend on two probable outcomes. If the part of the work he has done during the period is in fact useless and cannot be benefited from the employee shall become entitled to no pay. If the accomplished part ofthe work is useful and can be benefited from, and the employer is unwilling to extend the period, the employee shall become entitled to the amount normally paid for similar work (Ajr al-Mithl).

5/1/3 When a person is hired for doing a specific service/work, the employer has no right to hire out the service/work  of such person  to a sub-employer, unless the contract  permits  sub• hiring,  or this has been  agreed upon  by the two parties.  If the hired  service/work  is specifically defined and has to be delivered in the future, the employer in this case has the right to hire out to someone else an identical service/work (Parallel hiring). [see Shari'ah Standard No. (17) on Investment  Sukuk, item 5/2/10]

5/1/4 The employer should stick to utilizing the work/service of the hired person as per the permissible conditions that have been agreed upon.



847





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

5/1/5 When   the  hiring   contract   relates  to  a  specific  service,  the employee (the institution)  should own the service and have the ability to deliver it. Hence, it is impermissible  for the institution to sign a contract with the client before it possesses the service and  becomes  in  a position  to perform  actual  or constructive delivery.

5/1/6 Hiring  can  be  for  performing  a  future  service  that  is  well described  and  specified to  the  extent  which  leaves no  room for ambiguity  and dispute. In that  case the employer  does not have to own the required  service before signing the  contract. Consequently, an agreement may be reached for performing  the service at a specific time in the future, with due consideration to the ability of the employee to own the service and become able to deliver it on time, by himself or through  someone  else. The pay for the service here should not necessarily be made in advance, unless the contract  is a Salam or Salaf contract.  If the employee happens to deliver a service that does not conform to what has been agreed upon, the employer has the right to reject it and insist on having a service that conforms to specifications.

5/2  Rulings pertaining to the pay

5/2/1  The pay, whether in cash, or in-kind  or in the form of a service, should be well known  to  the  extent  that  leaves no  room  for dispute. It can be either fixed or variable according to a method which is well known to the two parties.

5/2/2 The  pay  can be determined for the  work  as a whole  so that the employee  becomes  entitled  to it after doing  all the work, or  it  can  be  determined in  installments and  the  employee becomes entitled to each installment at the relevant  stage of the work done. The pay can also be determined on the basis of a specific period, after which  the employee  becomes entitled to it, or such period can be divided  into sub-periods and the pay  determined accordingly.  Furthermore,  the  pay  can  be determined on  the  basis  of both  the  work  and  the  period,



848





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

and the employee becomes entitled to it when he performs the work within the specified period.  [see item 5/2/9]

5/2/3 The pay becomes obligatory when  the two parties sign the contract, and payable on delivery ofthe service/work or making it available (when the employee puts himself at the disposal of the employer even if the employer has not yet assigned a task to him). After signing the contract, there is no Shari'ah prohibition against forwarding the pay as a lump sum amount, or in installments.

5/2/4 The pay can be variable, yet the amount ofpay for the first period should be known. Following the first period, it is permissible to use an accurate indicator for predetermination ofthe pay for the successive periods. However, such indicator should be known to both parties and mutually agreed upon, for avoidance ofdispute. This indicator which replaces the specifically determined pay for the period should have an upper and a lower limit.

5/2/5 It is permissible, on the consent of the two parties, to amend the pay of future periods  (the periods  in which  benefiting from the service has not yet taken place), whereas the unpaid amounts ofpay that relate to past periods become a debt ob• ligation owed by the employer, and hence it is impermissible to stipulate a condition for increasing such amounts (resched• uling).

5/2/6 The pay can be determined as a percentage of the output (e.g.,
10%) or a part of the thing to be made.

5/2/7 It is permissible to stipulate in the contract  that  in case of default by the employer in the settlement of any installment, or when  he  refrains  from  doing  so without  a reasonable excuse and after a sufficient period  of notification; all other installments shall become  due and  eligible for premature settlement. However, the employee in this case does not own the prepaid installments  finally until he completes the work of the whole hiring period.  [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (8) on Murabahah, item 5/1]



849





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

5/2/8 It is impermissible to make  a condition which  leads  to any increment in the pay agreed upon,  in case of default by the employer. Nevertheless, the contract may include a pledge by the employer to donate, in case of default, a percentage of the pay for charitable purposes. Such donation should entirely go to charitable purposes, under  the supervision of the Sharf'ah Board of the institution.

5/2/9  It is permissible to agree upon more than one rate ofpay, as when the two parties agree that  if the work is done within a certain period  the pay will be this much,  and if it is done in another (shorter)  period  the pay will increase to that  much.  Similarly, two different  rates of pay can also be linked  to two different places, types, or specializations, of the work to be done.

6. Guarantees for Provision of the Pay and the Service

6/1  The employee has the right to obtain the permissible guarantees in their  different  forms so as to document his eligibility for receiving the pay. Likewise, the  employer  has  also the  right  to obtain  such guarantees for receiving  indemnity in case of any transgression or negligence  or breach  of the contract from  the part  of the employ• ee.  The  ruling  here  is,  in  fact, similar  to that  on  documentation and collateralization  (Rahn),  suretyship  (Kafalah)  transfer  of right
(Hawalat al-Haqq) and set-off (Maqassah).  [see Shari'ah  Standard
No.  (5) on Guarantees, item 2/3]

6/2  It is permissible to state in the contract that the pay has to be made in advance, deferred, or in installments. In case ofpremature termination of a contract in which the pay has already been made in advance, the two parties should resort to settlement. When the employee accepts any period  of delay for a pay that has to be settled in advance, such acceptance should be considered as a respite which the employee has willingly granted to the employer, and hence it can by no means be considered as a right of the latter. Due attention shall be given here to item 5/2/2.



850





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

7. Commitments  of the Employee and the Employer

7/1 Commitments of the employee

7I 1/ 1  The private employee has to render his service to the employer and observe the period  of hiring  during which he should not be absent, except on permission of the employer, or to perform a recognizable   duty.  Similarly, the  shared  employee  has  to perform the work  as agreed upon,  and within  the stipulated period, if any.

7/1/2  In principle, the employee is supposed to do the work by himself since he has been hired to perform a specific work required from him, unless the contract stipulates otherwise. This, however, does not hold true in case of hiring someone to do a future service/ work that has been specifically defined. In this latter case, what needs to be catered for is observation  of all the specifications mentioned in the contract.

7/1/3  In hiring of persons, it is permissible to stipulate a penalty code indicating a specific amount which the employee should pay to the employer in case of delay in performing the work/service within  the specified  period.  The amount  to be thus paid has to be determined  with due consideration to normal practice as well as justice.

7/2 Commitments of the employer

7/2/1  The employer shall observe the following:

a) Payment ofthe pay in advance, on deferred payment basis, or in installments as agreed upon. In the absence of agreement on a specific form of payment,  the due pay should be paid after rendering  the complete service to the employer, or on expiry of the hiring  period  in case of private  employment. When a due pay is delayed by the employer in spite of noti• fication the employee has the right to stop work or prevent the employer from utilizing the service that has already been done.



851





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

b) Provision  of facilities/requirements to the employee, if the work to be done so requires, or when provision  of such fa• cilities and requirements is stipulated in the contract.
8. Emergencies, Termination, Expiry and Renewal of Hiring Contracts

8/1  Emergencies of hiring

8/1/1 A  private   or  shared  hiring   contract which   relates  to  the employee in person as per normal practice, shall be terminated on the death of the employee, or when the employee loses his entire legal competence,  or when  - due to injury  or sickness
- he becomes  unable to work anymore  or for a period which is normally  considered to be  too  long  for the  employer  to tolerate.  Such  contract   shall  also  be  terminated when  the employee-institution encounters liquidation, bankru ptcy, or freezing of activities.

8/1/2 When  the employee  refrains  from  delivery  of the  service  as required, and fails to present the suitable alternative  as agreed upon, the employer has the right to terminate  the contract and demand indemnifi cation for the actual harm  caused to him by the act of the employee.
8/2 Termination, expiry and renewal of hiring contracts

8/2/1 In specific hiring, when the service/work becomes completely useless the  contract becomes  null and void;  whereas when  it is partially useless the employer has the right to terminate  the contract. If, instead, the service/work that has become useless pertains to hiring on the basis of future delivery of a well defined service, the contract shall remain valid, and the employee, in this case, has to deliver a similar service.

8/2/2  The hiring  contract  can be terminated  on  the  consent  of its two parties, yet none of them has the independent  right of its termination,  except for  a contingent  excuse or force majeure situation. The employer has the right to terminate the contract on the existence of a defect that makes the service useless. The



852





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

contract can also be terminated on the basis of a conditional option (Khiyar al-Shart), by the party who has stipulated such option, and within its specified period.

8/2/3 The employee has the right to stipulate termination of the contract when the employer fails to make or delay payment of the pay agreed upon, or when the employer does not pay one installment or more of such pay (Khiyar al-Naqd).

8/2/3 On the consent of the two parties, the hiring contract can be terminated before its effectiveness.

8/2/3 Hiring comes to an end at the end of the contract period, yet it remains when it is needed for a reasonable excuse or for avoidance ofharm. In case ofcontinuation, hiring shall be for a pay to be agreed upon between the two parties, otherwise the normal pay for similar services should be applied.

8/2/6 The hiring contract can be renewed for another period, whether renewal is to be declared before expiry of the original contract, or to take place spontaneously. For spontaneous renewal, a con• dition is to be stated in the contract indicating that the contract shall spontaneously become renewed on the commencement of a new period, if none ofthe two parties notifies the other about his disinterest in renewal.

9. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 28 Jumada II, 1429 A.H., corresponding to 2 July
2008A.D.
















853





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons





Adoption of the Standard


The Sharf'ah Board adopted the Standard  on Hiring of Persons in its meeting No.  (21) held on 24-28  Jumada II, 1429  A.H., corresponding to
28 June  - 2 July 2008 A.D.,  in Dar Al-Taqwa Hotel,  in Al-Madinah Al• Munawwarah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.











































854





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (14) held on 21-23 Rabi' I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 30 April - 2 May 2005 A.D., the Shari'ah Board decided to issue a Shari'ah standard on Hiring of Persons (usufructs of services).

On 29 Jumada I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 6 July 2005 A.D., the Secretariat General decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a study on Hiring of Persons (usufructs of services).

A joint  committee  composed  from  Shari'ah Committees  (1) and  (2) held a meeting in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, on 7 Jumada I, 1427 A.H. correspondingto 3 June 2006 A.D. The joint committee discussed and cleared the study, and asked the consultant to prepare the draft of the standard.

In a further meeting ofthe joint committee, held on Thursday 21 Sha'ban
1427 A.H., corresponding to 14  September 2006 A.D., in the Kingdom of Bahrain, the draft of the standard  was discussed and the consultant was requested to introduce necessary amendments in the light ofthe discussions and observations of the meeting.

In its meeting No. (19) held in MakkahAl-Mukarramah on 26-30 Sha'ban
1428 A.H., corresponding to 8-12 September 2007 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed the draft ofthe standard and introduced the changes that it deemed necessary.

In its meeting No.  (20) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on 4-8 Safar
1429  A.H.,  corresponding to  11-15  February  2008  A.D., the  Shari'ah Board discussed  once again the draft standard  and introduced further changes.



855





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

The Secretarial General of AAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 8 Jumada II, 1429 A.H., corresponding  to 12 June 2008 A.D. More than 30 participants attended the session as representatives of central banks, institutions, and accounting firms. The session was also attended by Shari'ah  scholars, university teachers  and  other  interested parties.  Several observations were made in the session, and duly responded to by the members of the Sharf'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2).

In its meeting  No.  (21)  held  in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah,  on  24•
28 Jumada II, 1429 A.H., corresponding  to 28 June - 2 July 2008 A.D., the Shari'ah  Board discussed the draft standard,  introduced  the changes that it deemed necessary and adopted the Standard.







































856





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons





Appendix (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


• Hiring of persons  is permissible according to Qur'an, Sunnah (Prophetic Traditions) and Ijma' (consensus ofFuqaha). In Qur'an this is emphasized in the Verse stating:  {"Then ifthey give suck to the children for you, give them their due payment}.
As far as Sunnah  is concerned, permissibility of hiring of persons can be derived, for instance, from the Hadith of the Prophet (peace be upon him)  in which he said:  "The most eligible  of whatsoever you have got a payfor, is the Book ofAlla• This in addition to many other Hadiths. In this regard, Al-Bukhari presented a whole chapter on Ijarah (hiring) which comprises 22 sections, and so did Abu Dawud, as well as other Sunnah scholars who referred to several Hadiths on the subject within other chapters.
Similarly,  Ijma'  (consensus   of  Fuqaha)  on  permissibility  of  hiring of persons is said to have been reached since the time of the Sahabah (companions of the Prophet, peace be upon him), as well as the time of their successors and the founding leaders of the schools of Fiqh. In this respectAl-Kasani said: "As regards Ijma' ofthe Ummah (Muslim Nation) it had been reached before the existence ofthe deaf......"
• Permissibility ofa pledge which is binding to only one party is supported by a number of Shari'ah proofs which support honoring of contracts, pledges and promises, in addition to what has been emphasized by some Sharf'ah scholars. On this regard, the International Islamic Fiqh Academy issued its

(2) [Al-Talaq (Divorce): 6]; and see: "Jami' Al-Bayan", by Al-Tabari, verified by Mahmoud
Shakir, Dar Ibn Hazm,  [28: 181].
(3) "Sahih AIL-Bukhari" with "Fath Al-Bari" [4: 452-453].
(4) "Bada 'i' AL-Sana'i", Muassasat Al-Tarikh AI-Arabi, Beirut, 1421 A.H. [4: 16].



857





Sharf'ah Standar d No.  (34): Hiring of Persons

resolution No. 40-41 (2/5 & 3/5) on Enforceability ofPledge in Murabahah. The rulings stated in that resolution  also hold true in the case of pledge in hiring and other similar dispositions.
• Permissibility for the institution to receive an amount  from the party who pledges  to  hire  its services  (seriousness  margin),  is based  on  need  and interest. A similar Fatwa (Shari'ah opinion) has been issued in this regard by the Unified Shari'ah Supervisory Board ofAl Baraka Group."That Fatwa is relevant to the case of hiring.
• Enforceability  of the  hiring contract is  derived   from  the  verses and Hadiths which  instruct people  to honor contracts,  as when  Allah,  the Almighty,  says:  {"O you who believe! Fulfill  (your) obligations..3}. besides  the  general  consensus among  fiqh  scholars  on  enforceability of hiring,""  since  it is a contract which  facilitates ownership  through exchange  of two objects.
■  The ruling  that  the period  of hiring  should  be specified stems from  the fact that non-specification could result in prohibited Gharar  (uncertainty) and Jahalah (ignorance)  which lead to dispute.  Prohibition  of sales which involve Gharar (uncertainty) has been emphasized bywellverified Hadiths." Therefore hiring of persons shall not involve Gharar, because, in essence, it is a sale of service/work.
• Permissibility of hiring  of persons  for doing deferred services is based on the practice  of the Prophet (peace be upon  him) when he and Abu Baler hired a man from Bani Al-Dail to serve them as a guide, after three days.0
Moreover, hiring  is a time-based contract  and therefore  its object  can be delivered in the future.
• Permissibility  of taking  'Arboun  (Earnest  Money)  is derived  from what
Omar  did in the presence of Sahabah  (companions  of the Prophet, peace

(5) The Journal of the Academy, Issue No. (5), Vol. (2), (pp. 754 and 965). (6) Fatwa No. (9/10) of the Unified Sharf'ah Board ofAl Baraka.
(7) [AI-Ma'idah (The Table): 1].
(8) "AL-Fatawa Al-Hindiyyah" [4: 410]; "AI-Sharh AL-Kabir"  [2: 4]; "AL-Rawdah"  [5: 173];
and "AL-Mughni" with "AI-Sharh AL-Kabir" [6: 20].
(9) "Sahih Muslim" [5: 3]; and "Sunan Abu Dawud" (H: 3376).
(10) "Sahih AL-Bukhari" with "AL-Fath [4: 443], AI-Matba'ah Al-Salafiyyah.



858





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (34): Hiring of Persons

be upon him), and adopted by Ahmad. On this regard, The Islamic Fiqh Academy of Makkah Al-Mukarramah  has also issued its resolution No.  72 (3/8).
• Sub-hiring  is permissible because when  the employer owns the  service/
work he becomes able to transfer it to someone else.
■  The ruling that a hiring contract can be conditional is based on the Hadith of the Prophet  (peace be upon him) which indicates:  "Muslims are at their conditions,  except a  condition  that permits what has  been prohibited  or prohibit what has been permitted?D
■  The ruling that hiring for a specific service is impermissible before owning and possessing the service, is reached by analogy to prohibition  of selling things that one does not own, and the Hadith which has been narrated by
Hakim Ibn Hizam stating:  "Don't sell what you do not have".3
• Permissibility of signing a hiring  contract  for a service to be delivered in the future, is judged by analogy to Salam, and because that does not lead to dispute. According to the Shaff'i and Hanbali scholars the pay should not necessarily be made in advance.
■  A private employee should not guarantee what he works on, except in case of transgression, negligence,  or breach of a condition.  This is actually the general principle in trust-based  contracts; in addition to that, the contract comprises an interest  for the  employee since he will receive the pay.  In case of transgression, negligence, or breach of condition the act results in harm, and hence the employee has to indemnify  the employer, as per the directives of the Prophet (peace be upon him) who said:  "No harm, and no
reciprocal harm"
■  The ruling that a shared employee has to guarantee what he works on,  is based on what has been reported about some of the Sahabah (companions
of the Prophet - peace be upon him) who emphasized that this has to be so,

(11) Related by AI-Bukhari:  "Fath AL-Bart",  "Kitab Al-ljarah" [4: 451]; and "Abu Dawud"
with "Awn AI-Ma'bud" [9: 516].
(12) Related by Abu Dawud in his "Sunan" (H: 3530); Al-Nasa'i in his "Sunan" [2: 225]; Ibn
Majah in his "Sunan" (H: 2187), and Ahmad in his "Musnad" [3: 42].
(13) Related  by Malik in  "AI-Muwatta",   "Kitab Al-Aqdiyah" [1:  464]; Ahmad  in  his
"Mausnad" [1: 313]  and [5: 327] and Ibn Majah in his "Sunan" [2: 784].



859





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (34): Hiring of Persons

because the shared employee will be doing what he has been paid to do in the absence of the owner, besides the fact that the employee in this case is working for many employers rather than for a particular employer.9
■  The  hired  service  shall  be  permissible  because  what  is  prohibited  by Shari'ah cannot be an object of a Sharf'ah-recognizable contract. Moreover, impermissible hiring entails provision of support to wrongdoing and misbehavior; whereas Allah, the Most High, says:  {"Help you one another
in Al-Birr and Al-Taqwa (virtue, righteousness andpiety, but do not help
one another in sin and transgression"}.A5
• The pay for future hiring periods  can be adjusted  on mutual  consent of the two parties,  because  such adjustment constitutes contract renewal for a coming  period.  No pay has yet become  payable  to the  employee for that future period  so that  it can become  a debt owed the employer, and   consequently  lead  to  prohibited  rescheduling  of  debt.  When, instead, such adjustment is done for an unsettled  amount  of pay which belongs to past periods, so as to extend the repayment period  against an increase in the  amount  to be paid, adjustment in this case will lead to Riba (usury). The  11 Seminar  of Al Baraka has already issued a Fatwa in this connection.09
■  The ruling that the pay can be composed  of two parts  is based on Tradi (mutual  consent), in addition  to the fact that such arrangement  neither violates the contract rulings nor does it encounter  a Shari'ah prohibition.
■  The pay can be in the form of a common  share, because the pay in this form can be known, and will not lead to dispute or Gharar (uncertainty).
• Permissibility of stipulating in the contract that all outstanding installments of the  pay  shall  become  due  in  case of default by the  employer in the settlement ofany installment is based on Tradi (mutual consent), besides the fact that such a condition neither violates the contract nor does it encounter
Sharf'ah prohibition. The Prophet (peace be upon him) said:  "Muslims are

(14)  "Bada 'f' AI-Sana  'i"  [4:  210];  "Hashiyat AL-Dusuqi"  [4: 23];  "Maughni AL-Muhtaj"
[2: 351] and  "AL-Mughni" with "Al-Sharh  Al-Kabir" [6:  115]. (15)  [AL-Madah (The Table): 2].
(16) The Book on Resolutions  and Recommendations of Al Baraka Seminar (11/2).



860





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

bound by the conditions the make".cm In this regard the International Islamic
Fiqh Academy has also issued its resolution No. 64 (2/7).0
• Impermissibility of stipulating a condition for increasing pay overdues is based on the fact that any increment  in such amounts  (against extension of settlement period) is Riha (usury). In this connection, The International Islamic Fiqh Academy issued its resolution No.  133 (7/14).9
• Permissibility of applying two rates  of pay  (so  that  the  employer would become entitled to the higher rate when he performs the work in the shorter period and vice versa) stems from the fact that such arrangement does not lead to Gharar (uncertainty) or Jahalah (ignorance). In addition to that, such arrangement had been Traditionally resorted to, and approved by a number of Fiqh scholars.
• Permissibility of seeking payment  guarantees, is similar to permissibility of Kafalah (suretyship) and Tawthiqat (documentations) in Islamic juris• prudence, besides the fact that request for guarantees here does not violate the rulings of the contract but rather confirms them, since guarantees are
suitable for debt contracts.
■  The contract  becomes  null  and void when  the service is completely  or partially  useless,  because  the  outcome  of the  contract  has  not  been accomplished, and the contract has not achieved its objectives. In addition to all that, the pay  is supposed  to be made  against  the benefit.  In this respect, the International Islamic Fiqh Academy issued its Resolution No.
13 (1/3).  If, instead, the contract relates to a specifically defined service
which  has to be delivered  in the  future,  the  contract  does not  become null and void because the service in question  will still remain  as a debt, and the employee should be asked to provide a service that has the same specifications.
■  The ruling that hiring will come to an end on expiry of the contract period
or on the consent ofthe two parties, is based on the fact that a hiring contract

(17) Reference has been referred to earlier.
(18) The Journal of the Academy, No. (6), (P. 193) and No. (7), Vol. (2), (P. 9). (19) The Journal of the Academy, No. (14), Vol.(4), (P. 687).
(20) See:  "AL-Fatawa Al-Hindiyyah" [4: 445] and "Al-Mughni" by Ibn Qudamah [5: 442].
(21)  See: the Journal ofthe Academy, No. (2), Vol. (2), (P. 527) and No. (3), Vol. (1), (P 77).



861





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

is a time-based contract and therefore, it expires at the end of the period. Similarly, a hiring contract is a consensual contract which starts and ends on the consent of the two parties.
• Permissibility of spontaneous renewal of the contract when it is stipulated as a condition  or when agreed upon between the two parties,  stems from the fact that such condition does not violate the rulings of the contract The Prophet  (peace be upon him) said:  "Muslims are bound by the conditions
the make".3
■  The basis for the commitments  of the employee and the employer is that such commitments  constitute essential requisites of the contract for hiring ofpersons. Moreover, such commitments are based on the agreement of the two parties. Both of these two justifications are unanimously  accepted by Shari'ah scholars.09
■    The ruling that a hiring contract which relates to the employee in person becomes null and void on the death, loss oflegal competency or persistent sickness of the employee, is based on the fact that the object of contracting will, thus, become no longer existent. Consequently, there will also be no pay since the pay is to be made in exchange of the benefit. In addition to all that, this ruling conforms to normal practice.
■  The ruling that a contract which relates to a future service does not become null and void on the death of the employee, is based on the fact that in this case the service, as a debt, is considered as existent
■  The pay shall become  due even if the employer could not benefit  from the employee who had put himself at his disposal. This ruling  is based on the fact that  the employee  is entitled  to the  pay since he has been able to  fulfill  the  condition of putting himself at the  disposal  of the employer, while  the  employer  has  no  excuse  for not  benefiting from the services.
• Permissibility of terminating  the hiring contract in case of contingencies is based on observation of need and necessity of avoiding hardship, in addi-

(22) Reference has been referred to earlier.
(23) See:  "Bada 'r' Al-Sana'i" [4  :210];  "Tabyin AL-Haqa 'iq" [5:  124]; Al-Dusuqi in "Al• Sharh AL-Kabir" [4: 23]; "Maughni AL-Muhtaj" [2: 351; and "AL-Maughni" with "AI-Sharh AL-Kabir" [6:115].



862





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (34): Hiring of Persons

tion to normal practice. A Fatwa in this regard has been issued by the Board of Fatwa and Shari'ah Supervision of the Kuwait Finance House.
• Permissibility for the employee to state a condition for termination of the contract when the pay is delayed is based on the fact that such condition is fair, and does not violate the rulings of the contract. The Prophet (peace be upon him) said:  "Muslims are at their conditions".5










































(24) Fatwa No. (232) and No. (252).
(25) Reference has been referred to earlier.



863

























