Shari'ah Standard No. (31)



Controls on Gharar in
Financial Transactions












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface...................................................................................................        771
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        772

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               772
2. Definition and Types of Gharar                                                                772
3. Shari'ah Status of Gharar                                                                          772
4. Controls on Gharar Which Violates Transactions...............................       772
5.  Scope of Gharar in Exchange-Based Contracts (Uqud al-Muawadat)        774
6. Impact of Gharar on Documentation  Contracts..................................       779
7. Impact of Gharar Which Stems from the Conditions  of the Con- tract............................................................................................................       780
8. Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................       780
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        781
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        782
Appendix (b):  The Sharf'ah Basis for the Standard....................................        784
Appendix (c):  Definitions.............................................................................        788




















769








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This standard aims at defining Gharar (uncertainty), indicating its types and impacts and emphasizing controls that need to be applied when Gharar is to the extent which nullifies transactions.







































771





Sharf'ah Standard No. (31): Controls on Gharar in Financial Transactions





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard covers the impact of excessive, medium  and minor Gharar on transactions  performed by Islamic financial institutions  (Institution/
Institutions). In this  respect  the  standard will set out  the  Shari'ah
rulings  pertaining   to  the  case when  Gharar  is involved  in  exchange• based  contracts/commutative   contracts  ('Uqud al-Muawadat)  including partnerships, and the case when Gharar is involved in donation contracts/ non-commutative contracts  ('Uqud al-Tabarru'at). The standard will also make special reference to the case when Gharar is involved in a contract's condition.

2. Definition and Types of Gharar

2/1  Gharar  is a state of uncertainty that exists when the process of con• cluding a transaction involves an unknown  aspect. In other words, Gharar refers to the status of results that may or may not materialize.

2/2  Degree-wise, Gharar can be excessive, medium  or minor. As regards its effect on the transaction, Gharar can be to the extent which nullifies the contract or it may not be so.

3. Shari'ah Status of Gharar

It is impermissible in Shari'ah to conclude a contract or stipulate a condition that involves a degree of Gharar which could jeopardize the fulfillment  of the contracts stipulations. The degree of Gharar for this purpose is judged as per item (4) below.

4. Controls on Gharar Which Violates Transactions

Gharar violates the transaction when it satisfies the following four condi•
tions:

(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banlcs.



772





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions

a) If it is involved in an exchange-based contract or any contract of that nature.

b) If it is excessive in degree.

c) If it relates to the primary subject matter ofthe contract. d) If it is not justified by a Shari'ah-recognizable necessity.
4/1  First Condition: When Gharar is in an exchange-based  contract or a similar contract:
This includes, for instance, sale, lease and partnership contracts, whereas Gharar does not affect donation contracts such as gift and will contracts.

In an exchange-based contract Gharar can be either in the form or subject matter of the contract.

4/2  Second Condition: When Gharar is excessive

4/2/ l  Gharar is excessive when it becomes a dominating and distinctive aspect of the contract,  and is capable of leading to dispute. However, assessment of Gharar for such purpose could differ according to place and time, and has to be determined in the light ofnormal practice (Urf). Examples ofexcessive Gharar include selling of fruits before production, signing a lease contract for an unspecified period, and sale of a Salam commodity that is not usually available on date of delivery. Gharar in any of these forms sets the contract null and void.

4/2/2 Minor Gharar is the degree of Gharar that a contract could hardly avoid, and is not sufficient to generate dispute. This includes transactions like sale of a house to a buyer who has not seen its foundation, or leasing the house for one month while months differ in length. Such type of Gharar does not affect the contract.

4/2/3 Medium Gharar falls between excessive and minor and its ex• amples are: sale of underground commodities or commodities that cannot be known unless broken,  or leasing of fruit trees.



773





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions

Medium Gharar can also exist in contracts like Ju'alah (payment of a specific reward for a task if accomplished), guardianship, companies  and fixed-term Mudarabah. Medium  Gharar  does not affect the contract.

4/3  Third Condition:  When  Gharar relates to the primary  object of the contract

If Gharar relates to the primary subject matter  of the transaction,  it sets the contract  null and void, as when unripe  fruits are sold (apart from the trees and without  a stipulation  for awaiting harvesting).  If, instead, Gharar is in a corollary ( Tabi') of the primary  subject matter, it has  no  effect  on  the  contract.  The  example  here  is selling the unripe  fruits along with the trees, or selling the nonexistent part  of the plants along with the part that already exists. A further  example of Gharar in a corollary is a fetus sold along with the pregnant sheep, or milk in the udder of a sold sheep.

4/4  Fourth Condition: When no Shari'ah-recognizable need has neces•
sitated Gharar in the contract

Need in this context (which could be public or private)  refers to the situation when refraining from commitment ofimpermissible Gharar leads to severe hardship, though  may not amount to mortality. Need should also be inevitable; i e, there should be no permissible way of accomplishing  the  task, except through  the  contract  that  involves excessive Gharar.  Commercial  insurance, in the absence of Takaful (solidarity insurance)  can be cited here as a fitting example.

5. Scope of Gharar in Exchange-Based  Contracts ('Uqud al-Mu'awadat)

Gharar in this type of contracts  could be in the form, object or terms of the contract.

5/1  Excessive Gharar in the form of the contract

Gharar is said to be in the form of the contract when it relates to offer and acceptance rather than to the object ofthe contract. Practical types of such Gharar comprise the following:



774





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions

5/1/1  Combining two sales in one sale (Bayatayn Fi Bay'ah)

Combining two sales in one sale nullifies the contract, and the examples of that is selling a good for one thousand  pounds  in cash or two thousands on deferred payment, without concluding any of the two deals.

5/1/2 Sales in which the deal is finalized subject to random  selection of the sold object

Sales  become  void when  the  sold item  is randomly  selected. One example of such type of sale is Bay' al-Hasah (sale by stone throwing), in which the seller throws a stone and the buyer has to accept the item on which the stone falls. Another example is Bay' al-Munabadhah  (throwing of the sold commodity), where the seller throws to the buyer one of the commodities he wants to sell. Such sale could also be conducted by using a programmed machine to determine the sold good irrespective ofthe choices of the seller and the buyer.

5/2  Gharar in the object of the contract

5/2/1  Gharar  in sold or leased objects and the like

5/2/1/1    Gharar which results from ignorance of the essence of the sold commodity  nullifies the contract. This type of Gharar takes place when, for instance, a sale contract is concluded without indicating what the sold commodity is.  Ignorance  of the  essence  of the  sold  commodity would consequently result in ignorance of the type and characteristics of that commodity.

5/2/1/2   Gharar which stems from ignorance  of the type of the sold commodity  nullifies the contract, as when a car is sold without specifying its type, or when an amount of currency is sold (through a currency exchange contract) without indicating  the type of that currency  or having a generally accepted tradition  for its determination.



775





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions

5/2/1/3   Gharar which results from lack of knowledge of the sold commodity in particular (non-specification ofthe commodity) nullifies the contract. The example of this is sale of a non-specified car from a number of cars in a car showroom, or sale ofa piece ofland in a residential area without the option of specification.

5/2/1/4   Gharar due to ignorance ofthe specific characteristics of the sold commodity  (for commodities  that usually differ in nature)  nullifies the contract.  This happens when  a nonexistent  commodity  is sold without  de• scribing it.

5/2/1/5  Gharar  due to ignorance  of the amount  of the sold commodity, such as Bay' al-Juzaf(sale of an unknown quantity),  nullifies  the  contract, except  when  there exist the conditions that make Gharar forgivable. Such conditions include: viewing the sold commodity at the time of sale, or when estimation is possible in the case ofthe commodity in question, or ifwhat really matters for that specific commodity is the quantity as a whole rather than the individual components. In such cases, Gharar does not nullify the contract.

5/2/2 Gharar in the price or rent of the contract's object

Gharar  could arise when, for instance, a commodity  is sold without mentioning  the price, or when the price is left to be determined  by one of the two parties of the contract,  or by a third party. Another  example here is the case of somebody purchasing a commodity for an amount ofmoney in a bundle or in his pocket. A third example is purchasing the commodity by using a currency which the buyer ignores its issuer and has no indication that could help him to know it. In all these cases, Gharar nullifies the sale contract.

However, there are some cases where Gharar in the price is permitted, as - for instance - when the sale contract is concluded



776





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions

at the market price on the day ofpurchase, or at the price to be set by the market on the day of purchase, or at the price people usually sell at

Sale with forgivable Gharar in price could also include purchasing commodities through Bay' al- Istjrar, in which the buyer obtains the goods regularly from the seller for a price to be determined subject to the price that  people normally sell at, or subject to an index, and even after consumption of the goods in question.

A similar sale contract is that which comprises selling, at unit price, of a quantity of the commodity which the buyer can see, yet does not know its exact amount or total value. That is to say, one could sell a quantity of grains at the price per kilogram, or he could rent a car at a rent per mile, so that the payable amount of rent is determined after reaching the target destination.

Furthermore, such sales may include concluding a lease contract at the rent normally paid for similar property, or for a variable rent to be indicated by a specialized index.

In all these preceding cases, the contract does not become null and void.

5/3  Gharar relating to ignorance of the contract's period

5/3/1 The contract becomes null and void when its duration  is not stipulated. If, however, Gharar is removed by knowledge ofthe contract's  duration, or abandonment of the duration, at the time of contracting, the contract becomes valid.

5/3/2 Gharar  can be forgiven in postponement of the price until known seasons such as season ofharvesting. In this case, the two parties  should  observe  the normal  date  of the  season rather than the event of harvesting.

5/4 Gharar pertaining to failure in delivery

Gharar which relates to failure in delivery nullifies the contract. Ex•
amples of such Gharar include selling offish in the water, unless it is



777





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions

found in a confined place and does not require fishing. Such type of Gharar can also be seen in the sale (without option) of a commodity to be imported  from abroad, and one is not sure whether  a license for its importation would be obtained  or not.

5/5  Gharar relating to sale of non-owned commodities

Gharar  relating to sale of a non-owned commodity nullifies the sale contract. It refers to the case when  the seller does not  (personally) have the  commodity at the  time  of signing  the  contract,  and  has to purchase  it from the market. Salam and Istisna'a are exceptional cases here (subject to their respective conditions).

5/6 Gharar that results from sale of non-held commodities

A person  shall not sell a commodity (whether it is a real estate or movable property) that he does not guarantee through  actual or con• structive holding. In the absence of actual or constructive  holding, it will not be possible to determine the party that possesses (and hence guarantee)  the sold object. Therefore, selling a commodity that one does not own nullifies the sale contract.
Actual holding  in this context refers to receiving the good in hand, or receipt  of the  exact  quantity  in case of commodities  measured in terms of volume or so.  If the deal in question  pertains  to a Juzaf
commodity (a commodity of an unknown quantity) holding would require  shifting the commodity to another  location. Holding  in all cases, other than  the preceding  ones, shall be judged  as per normal practice.

As regards constructive  holding, it indicates the act of releasing the commodity and facilitating the process of its holding.

5/7  Gharar resulting from sale of nonexistent  commodities

It is impermissible to sell a commodity that neither existents at present, nor does its existence in the future is ensured. Mu'awamah  sale (sale of fruits to be delivered over several years) is a good example of such transactions.



778





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions

5/8  Gharar which results from lack of viewing  the sold commodity
(Bay' al-Ayn al-Gha 'ibah)

5/8/1 It is impermissible to sell a commodity without enabling the buyer to view it or obtain its full description.  Nevertheless, a commodity  can be sold on the basis of mere description, whether  description  is to be made by the seller or someone else.  Description   should  include  all those  characteristics which could affect the price. The buyer should then conclude the deal if the commodity  is exactly as described, otherwise he is free to conclude the deal or not.

5/8/2 It is permissible to sell an asset that the buyer has seen sometime before the time of signing the contract, provided that the asset has undergone no change since that time.

5/8/3 A sale can be concluded on the basis of a model that indicates the characteristics of the sold commodity.

6. Impact of Gharar on Documentation Contracts

6/1  Impact of Gharar on Rahn (Mortgage) contracts

Rahn (Mortgage) can permissibly involve a degree of Gharar that is not allowed in sale. For instance, a lost car or a farm that has not yet reached the stage ofgiving yield can be the object of a mortgage contract. Nonetheless, such property cannot be sold for settlement ofthe debt, unless the lost car is found or the farm has reached the stage of giving yield.  [see Shari'ah Standard No. (5) on Guarantees]

6/2  Impact of Gharar on suretyship (Kafalah) contracts

Suretyship  (Kafalah) can also involve a degree of Gharar that is not permitted in sale. Suretyship can be conditional (provided that the condition does not contradict with the stipulations ofthe contract); or it can be for an unknown period; or it may relate to a future obligation. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (5) on Guarantees]

6/3  Impact of Gharar on agency (Wakalah) contracts

Agency (Wakalah) is permissible with Gharar, if there are indications or traditions that can be used for specifying its subject matter.  For



779





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions

instance, agency can be conditional, or its subject matter can be identified through  some of its forms. This shall, however, hold true when agency is free of charge, otherwise it shall be treated like Ijarah (hiring) and, thus, affected by Gharar. It is also permissible to make general agency contracts. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (23) on Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned  Agent (Fodooli)]

7. Impact of Gharar Which Stems from the Conditions of the Contract

The condition  which results in Gharar  in the form or subject matter  of the contract:
A contract  becomes null and void if it contains  a condition  that causes Gharar  in  its form,  as when  it contains  an  option  without  time  limit. A contract can  also become  null  and void  for involving  Gharar  in  its subject matter, as in the case of "Bay' al-Thunya" which refers to partial sale of a property, while  retaining the  remaining  part  as an  exception (e.g., selling a multistory building with the exception of one floor without specifying it). Such sale is permissible  only  if the  retained part  of the property  is specified.

8. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 26 Sha'ban  1428 A.H., corresponding to 9
September 2007 A.D.























780





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah  Board adopted the Standard  on Controls  on Gharar in
Financial Transactions in  its meeting No.  (19)  held on 26-30 Sha'ban
1428 A.H.,  corresponding to 8-12 September 2007 A.D., in Makkah Al• Mukarramah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.











































781





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (14) held on 21-23 Rabi' I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 30 April - 2 May 2005 A.D.,  in Dubai (U.A.E.),  the Shari'ah Board decided to issue a Shari'ah Standard on Controls on Gharar in Financial Transactions.

On 20 Jumada II, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 26 July 2005 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee decided to commission a consultant to pre• pare a study on Controls on Gharar in Financial Transactions.

The study was discussed in a joint meeting of the Sharf'ah Standards
Committees (1) and (2), held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 8-9 Rabi' I,
1427 A.H., corresponding to 6-7 April 2006 A.D. The joint committee then advised the consultant to introduce the necessary changes in the Standard, in the light of the discussions and observations of the meeting.

The revised draft of the Standard was discussed in another joint meeting of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2), held in Al-Madinah Al• Munawarah, on 7-12 Jumadah I, 1427 A.H., corresponding to 3-8 June 2006
A.D. The consultant was again advised to introduce changes in the Standard as per the discussions and observations ofthe meeting.

In its meeting No. (17) held inMakkahAl-Mukarramah, on27 Shawwal
- 1  Dhul-Qa'dah 1427 A.H., corresponding to 18-23 November 2006 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the changes in the Standard which had been made by the joint meeting of Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2), and introduced changes that it deemed necessary.

The Secretarial General ofAAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 18 Safar  1428 A.H., corresponding to 8 March 2007 A.D.



782





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions

More than 30 participants attended the session as representatives of central banks, institutions, and accounting firms. The session was also attended by Shari'ah scholars, university teachers and other interested parties. Several observations were made in the  session, and duly responded  to by the members of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2).

In its meeting No.  (19) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah  during 26
Sha'ban - 1  Ramadan 1428 A.H., corresponding to 8-12 September 2007
A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed the amendments that had been suggested in the public hearing, introduced changes that it deemed necessary and adopted the Standard.









































783





Sharf'ah Standard No. (31): Controls on Gharar in Financial Transactions





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


■  Gharar is divided into excessive, medium  and minor, because there is a degree of Gharar which contracts  could hardly avoid, whereas there is an excessive degree of Gharar  that  could become  a distinguishing aspect of the contract, such as Bay' al-Gharar (aleatory sale). In order to specify the two extreme limits of Gharar (excessive and minor) there should be a midpoint of Gharar  (medium Gharar). Regarding controls on excessive Gharar, Abu Al-Walid Al-Baji said: "It is the  degree  of Gharar which becomes so dominant in the contract, that the contract is described in terms of it.
■  Prohibition of concluding a contract or making a condition that involves Gharar is based on the Hadith (Prophetic tradition)  which states: "The Prophet (peace be upon him) hasforbidden aleatory sale. AL-Nawawi said: "This Hadith is a great origin ofShari'ah injunctions on sales and covers an unlimited number of issues.
■  Assessing excessive Gharar in terms of the four conditions mentioned  in this Standard is justified as follows:
1. If Gharar is in an exchange-based contract: Involvement of Gharar in exchange-based  contracts  would lead to unlawful acquisition  of the wealth of other people, whereas it is not so in donation  contracts. No dispute would arise in the case ofdonation contracts, since the recipient ofthe donation would incur no loss.
2. IfGharar is excessive: This is due to the consensus ofthe Shari'ah scholars on the impact of excessive Gharar on contracts. They have derived this conclusion from cases in which, due to involvement of excessive Gharar, contracts have been nullified by Hadiths (Prophetic traditions).

(2) "AI-Muntaqa" by AI-Baji  [1: 41].
(3) Related by Muslim in his "Sahih" [3: 156] with comments by Al-Nawawi  et al; and used
by AI-Bukhari as a heading of a chapter in his "Sahi: "Umdat Al-Qari" [11: 264]. (4) AI-Nawawi comments, in "Muslim" [10: 156].



784





Sharf'ah Standard No. (31): Controls on Gharar in Financial Transactions

3) 1f Gharar is in the primary subject matter of the contract  rather than in a corollary: This is based on the Qa'idah (Fiqh Principle):  "What can be forgiven in corollaries is not so elsewhere'. [item (45) of Qwa'id Al-Majallah]
4) 1f it is not justified by a Shari'ah-recognizable  need: This is because Shari'ah has come for the sake of relieving people from hardship, as Allah, the Almighty, states:  {".and has not laid upon you in religion
any hardship}• This holds true whether the need is public or private,
as per the Fiqh Principle which states: "Need, whether public or private, enjoys the same status of necessity".  [ Qwa'id Al-Majallah, item (33)]
■  A contract which contains  Gharar  in its form is null and void because it will remain  unconcluded. Gharar  in this case tends to make finalization of the contract probable rather than definite. This has been derived from a number  of similar cases on which strict prohibiting texts are available, such as the types of sales referred to in the Standard as well as other cases indicated  in Fiqh sources."
■  The contract  is null and void when its subject matter  involves Gharar  in its kind, nature, type or characteristics, because Gharar  in these aspects is excessive and  there  are  Shari'ah  texts  which  prohibit   similar  sales. Moreover,  such  cases involve  a great  deal of Jahalah  (ignorance)  and, thus, may lead to dispute. Jahalah here cannot be resolved by offering the buyer the option of viewing for instance.
■  The basis for nullity of a contract  that involves Gharar  in the amount  of
its subject matter  is the consensus  of the Shari'ah scholars  on denial  of ignorance  of the amount, whether  of the commodity sold or the price. It is also because ignorance ofthe amount leads to dispute that hinders  deli• very and receipt. <7l Permissibility of the cases which satisfy the conditions mentioned in this Standard (5/2/1/5 and 5/2), is due to the fact that such conditions  make Gharar forgivable.

(5) [A1-Hajj (The Pilgrimage): 78].
(6) "BidayatAL-Majtahid" [2: 153]; "Fath AI-Qadir" [5: 196]; "AL-Mjmu" [9: 340]; "AI-Sharh
AL-Kabir" by Al-Dardir [3: 2]; "AI-Muqaddimat" by Ibn Rushd (The Grand Father)  [2:
221]; "AL-Maughni" [4: 207]; and "AL-Bahr AI-Zakhkhar" [2: 293]. (7) "Hashiyat Ibn Abidin" [4: 28]; and "AI-Bada 'tr" [5: 158].



785





Sharf'ah Standard No. (31): Controls on Gharar in Financial Transactions

■  Invalidity of the contract when its duration is unknown rests on the fact that it could generate dispute. Prohibition has been reported about a sale contract known as "Bay' Habal al-Habalah", which denotes a type of sale in which the price is postponed until the fetus of the camel is born and has given birth  to another  camel. The Qur'an has also indicated that indebtedness should have a specific duration: {"O you who believe! when you contract a debtfor afixed period, write it down}."
■  The nullity of the contract due to Gharar that relates to failure in delivery
can be justified in terms ofthe excessive degree ofGharar it involves. A sale contract is meant to safeguard the rights ofboth parties (the seller and the buyer). If, instead, the seller is to get the price, while the buyer is unable to get the sold object, this will violate the very objective of the contract.
■  impermissibility  of the act of someone selling what he does not own
stems from the Hadith which states: "The Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, hasforbidden peoplefrom selling things that they do not own.9
Prohibition ofselling non-possessed property is also due to the excessive Gharar that failure in delivery could comprise. Gharar relating to failure in delivery is, in fact, the reason behind prohibition of selling a property which the seller does not hold, even legally. This has been derived from a Hadith"in this connection. Moreover banning sale of non-possessed property comes under the Fiqh Principle which states: "Any property that neither existent at present nor does its existence in the future is ensured should not be sold".  In this regard also, many scholars have explicitly mentioned  that sale of nonexistent property falls under Bay' al-Gharar (aleatory sale).0
■  The Shari'ah basis of the details mentioned in this standard about sale of a nonexistent asset is the degree of Gharar involved therein.  Gharar in this type of sale can be avoided only if the asset in question is well des-

(8) [Al-Baqarah (The Cow): 282].
(9) Related by AI-Tirmidhi in "AI-Sunan" [1: 159].
(10) Related by Muslim in his "Sahih" (1529) in the following words "Ifyou purchasefood, do not sell it until you hold it".
(11)  "Nay! Al-Awtar" [5:  244];  "AI-Bahr AI-Zakhkhar"  [3:  381]; "Al-Majmu' Sharh AL• Muhadhdhab" [9: 258]; and "AL-Muhadhdhab" by AI-Shirazi.



786





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions

cribed;  otherwise absence of viewing may hinder the conclusion of the contract. The Hanafi scholars argue that the buyer should have the option ofviewing so that the risk of Gharar can be avoided
■  The ruling that Gharar does not affect Rahn contracts  is based on the
fact that the Rahn (Mortgage) contract is not meant in itself, since it is a corollary contract signed for documentation.
■  Similarly, the ruling that Gharar does not affect agency in the strict Sha• ri'ah sense is based on the same reasons mentioned in the case ofmortgage, besides the fact that agency is primarily based on donation.
■  Suretyship  is permissible with Gharar because suretyship is a corollary
contract based on delegation ofthe right ofdisposal. However, if suretyship is paid for, it becomes an exchange-based contract and, thus, affected by Gharar.
■  Nullity of a contract which involves Gharar in any of its conditions origi•
nates from what has been discussed above about aleatory contracts.


































787





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Ghurur and Taghrir (Deception)

The  difference between Gharar, and  (Ghurur or Taghrir) is that  the latter results from a statement, or an act, or a position which  a person re• sort to for the sake of deceiving  others, whereas Gharar does not involve any deception.

Jahalah (Ignorance)

The difference  between Gharar  and Jahalah is that Jahalah refers to lack of knowledge  about  the details of something,  in spite of knowledge  about its occurrence. In this sense, Gharar  is more  comprehensive than  Jahalah. Therefore, all things that are unknown involve Gharar, whereas not all things that involve Gharar are unknown.

Qimar (Gambling), Murahanah (Betting) and Gharar

Gharar is similar to Qimar and Murahanah in that it entails a result which could be accomplished  or not. However,  Gharar  does not resemble  Qimar and Murahanah in constituting a means that each party  uses for acquiring money from the other party. Therefore, Qimar is more specific than Gharar, because not all Gharar is Qimar.

Definition of the Mudaf (Postponed)

Idafah  (postponement), refers to delay of the contract's  effectiveness  to a specific time in the future, and hence Idafah  does not involve uncertainty like Gharar.










788
























