Shari'ah Standard No. (38)




Online Financial  Dealings












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface...................................................................................................        947
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        948

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               948
2. Launching Commercial Websites for Contractual Dealings..............       948
3. Provision of Online Access Services                                                            948
4. Contract  Signing  Session (Majlis  al-'Aqd) for Concluding Online
Financial Contracts..................................................................................       949
5. Expressing Offer and Acceptance in Online Financial Contracts .....        950
6. Time of Commencement of an Online Contract.................................       951
7. Possession (Qabd) in Online Financial Contracts...............................       951
8. Protection of Online Financial Dealings                                                  951
9. Date oflssuance of the Standard                                                              954
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        955
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        956
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard.....................................       958
Appendix (c):  Definitions..............................................................................        962



















945








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to indicate the Shari'ah rulings relating to conclusion ofcontracts and financial dealings online, and illustrate what the Institution/ Institutions!should observe in this respect.

































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



947




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard covers the Shari'ah rulings relating to conclusion of financial contracts online, either by launching commercial websites, or by provision of online access services. The standard aims to indicate the various aspects pertaining  to  this  subject  such  as the  Shari'ah  status  of the  contracts concluded in this manner, determination  of the time of contract inception, permissible  procedures   of  possession  after  signing  the  contract,  and Shari'ah rulings relating to protection of online financial dealings.

2. Launching Commercial Websites for Contractual Dealings

2/1  It is permissible in Shari'ah to launch commercial websites, provided that such sites do not involve any impermissible act, such as promotion of impermissible goods and services, or using impermissible means to promote pemissible goods and services.

2/2  It is permissible in Sharf'ah to conclude online contracts, provided that the contracts  thus concluded  between the institution  and its clients observe the general rules of financial transactions  as prescribed by the Sharf'ah, regarding for instance, opening of the accounts, performing remittances and signing commercial contracts.

3. Provision  of Online Access Services

3/1  Sharf'ah permits institutions to provide online access services to users on the basis of subscription  contracts or any other similar arrangement, and against a specific fee.

3/2  The contract for provision of online access service by the institution is a shared-hiring contract "Ijarah Mushtarakah" signed between the institution and the beneficiary. Therefore, it should become subject to the conditions  and rulings of the contract  for hiring of persons in general, and those of the contract  for hiring of a shared employee in



948




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings

particular.  [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (34) on Hiring of Persons and
Sharf'ah Standard No. (9) on Ijarah and Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek]

3/3 The institution which provides such service should take all necessary precautions and measures to prevent impermissible use of the inter• net by the beneficiaries to whom the Institution provides the access service.

4. Contract Signing Session  (Majlis  al-'Aqd)  for Concluding  Online
Financial Contracts

4/1  When the contract is concluded through audio or audiovisual com• munication between the two parties, it should become subject to the same Shari'ah rulings on contracts signed in the presence of the two parties. Consequently it should satisfy the rulings relating to this type of contracts which include, for instance: simultaneous presence of the two parties (Itihad al-Majlis), non-existence of any indication of disinterest from any of the two parties, succession of offer and acceptance (as per normal practice), and all the other rulings.

4/1/1 The contract signing session in this case is the time of com• munication between the two parties if the conversation relates to the contract. If the conversation is over or disconnected, or the two parties shifted to another subject, the contract signing session is considered to have stopped (unless disconnection of the conversation is for a reasonably short while).

4/2 When the contract is concluded through written communication, by e-mail, or through  access to site, it shall become subject to the rulings  applicable to contracts  signed in the  absence of the two parties, because such deal is similar to message contracting.

4/2/1 The contract signing session in the case indicated in item 4/2 above starts from the moment of communicating the offer to the concerned party up to issuance ofacceptance. The contract signing session may also be discontinued when the offering party retreats from his offer before an acceptance decision is made by the other party.



949




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings

4/2/2 When  the offering party  specifies a certain period  for validity of his offer, the time allowed for acceptance  should  cover the whole  period. The  offering party  has  no  right  to withdraw from his offer during that period.

4/3 When  the contract  is concluded through  online bidding the highest bidder  should  not  retreat  from his bid until  the  bidding  process is over. The highest bidder  should also not retreat from his offer after finalization of the bidding process if the seller had made a condition that the  offer should  remain  binding  for a certain  period,  or if the normal practice necessitates validity of the offer for such period.

5. Expressing Offer and Acceptance in Online Financial Contracts

5/1  Expression of offer and acceptance in online contracts  can be in any form  that  indicates  the consent  of the two parties  to conclude  the contract.

5/2 When the offering party  sends through  website or e-mail a message containing all the rights and commitments pertaining to the contract in question without  retaining  the right of withdrawal  if the message is accepted, that message is considered  as an offer.

5/3  When the offering party sends the electronic message through website or e-mail without indicating all the rights and commitments  relating to the contract in question, or when he stipulates a condition that he should have the right of withdrawal  even if the message is accepted, the message is considered to be an announcement  or an invitation for contracting  rather  than  an offer. In this case a process of offer and acceptance has to be done.

5/4 When  the  contract  is concluded  through  website, clicking on  the acceptance  icon  is considered  as acceptance in  the  strict  Shari'ah sense if the system in the website does not require  confirmation of acceptance. If the system in the website requires confirmation of ac• ceptance in any way, acceptance does not take place without making such confirmation.



950




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings

5/4/1 The Institution which provides  its services on website should include  in the system  a step for acceptance confirmation as a precautionary measure  against dealers' mistakes.
6. Time of Commencement of an Online Contract

Irrespective of the method  of contracting, an online contract is considered to be valid  since the  time  when  the  other  party  accepts the  offer and whether  the offering party has come to know that or not.
7. Possession (Qabd) in Online Financial Contracts

7/1  Regarding  online  contracts,  possession  in the  strict  Shari'ah sense takes place through  all accepted methods  of actual and constructive possession.  [see Sharf'ah Standard No.  (18) on Possession  (Qabd), items 3 and 5]
7/2  If the sold commodity  is computer software or the like, possession in the strict Shari'ah sense takes place when the purchaser, after signing the contract,  downloads  the software or the data or any good of this type from the website to his personal  computer.

7/3 When  the  sold commodity is a currency, gold, silver or any other commodity in which instant exchange (Taqabud)  is required, instant exchange  of the  two objects  of the  contract  should  be ascertained during  the contract's  signing session.
8. Protection of Online Financial Dealings

8/1 Protection ofcommercial sites and dealers dataagainstbeing trespassed

8/1/1 Commercial websites are considered as private  properties of their owners, and therefore  their trespassing could necessitate compensation.

8/1/2 The  institution should  use all possible  measures of website protection, so as to safeguard its own rights as well as the rights of its clients.

8/1/3  Trespassing of dealers' online data is impermissible. It is strictly prohibited to sell such data or transmit  it to others without the permission of its owners.



951




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings

8/1/4 Verification of trespassing of commercial sites and data stealing should  be done by referring  to the prevailing  traditions and regulating rules which do not encounter the rules and principles ofShari'ah.

8/1/5 The compensation due in case of trespassing  should comprise direct  financial loss as well as actual loss of earnings.  Expert advice for assessment of compensation  can also be sought when need arises.

8/1/6  Compensation shall become due only when it is claimed, whereas claiming compensation does not have a specific time limit after the incident of trespassing is known. In this regard relevant rules and regulations should be observed provided that they do not contradict with the rules and principles of Shari'ah.

8/1/7  In case of stealing money or confidential data from a protected website the responsibility should rest with the person who com• mitted the theft directly.  If it is not possible, for a permissible reason, to charge the person who committed the act of theft di• rectly, the responsibility should rest with the one who facilitated the act. The owner ofthe site is by no means chargeable for such act, if he has taken all possible measures to protect his site, and unless he has pledged to shoulder such responsibility under all circumstances.

8/2 Verification of dealers' identities

8/2/1 In order to safeguard  its own interests,  the Institution should take all possible precautions and measures to verify the identities of its website  dealers,  and  make  sure  that  they  are  legally competent for concluding valid contracts.

8/2/2 It is acceptable  in  Shari'ah  to  adopt  the  electronic  signature as a means of verifying the identities  of dealers, provided  that such means  is adoptable  by virtue  of the prevailing rules and regulations.



952




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings

8/2/3 When  forgery  or an  error is committed with  regard  to the personality or characteristics of one  of the  two parties,  the other party has the right to terminate the contract.
8/2/4 For verification  of forgery or error recourse should be to the general rules of evidence.
8/3 Protection of dealers from adhesion contracts ('Uqud al-Izan)

8/3/1  It can be noticed that in a big part  of the online contracts the offer is addressed to the public in general and the contract has uniform details. In such contracts also the offering party alone has  the  right  of stipulating  the  terms  and  conditions  of the contract, while the other party does not have the right to change such terms and conditions. A contract of this type is considered as an "adhesion contract''  when  it relates to a commodity  or usufruct  that  nobody  can  do without, and the  offering party assumes actual and legal monopoly or face only meager degree of competition in its supplying.

8/3/2 According  to  Sharf'ah,  online  adhesion  contracts  should  be subject to state control so as to protect dealers by endorsement of what is equitable  and elimination  of what is inequitable  in these contracts, before launching them to dealers.
8/3/3  Ifthe price in the online adhesion contract is fair, and the terms and conditions  of the contract  do not entail any injustice  for the adhering party, the contract is considered to be permissible and binding to its two parties.
8/3/4 Ifthe price in the online adhesion contract is unfair  (comprises excessive injustice), or the contract includes an unjust condition for the adhering party, the latter has the right to resort to law for nullification of the contract or amending its conditions for the sake of relieving him from the consequent injustice.

8/4  If the  online  contract  is concluded  on the  basis of describing  the sold object,  or depending  on the fact that the buyer has previously seen the object, or on presentation  of a model resembling the object,



953




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings

whereas at the time ofdelivery the sold object is found to be different, the buyer  should have the choice between  concluding  the contract, terminating it, or negotiating  with  the seller appropriate  means  of settlement.

9. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued 17 Rabi' I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 15 March
2009A.D.













































954




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted the Standard on Online Financial Dealings in
its meeting No. (23) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain, on Thursday- Saturday
15-17 Rabf' I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 12-15 March 2009 A.D.













































955




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No.  (16) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah, on 7-12
Jumada I, 1427  A.H.,  corresponding  to 3-8 June 2006 A.D., the Shari'ah
Board decided to issue a Sharfah standard on Online Financial Dealings.

On  12 Rajah  1427 A.H., corresponding  to 6 August 2005  A.D.,  the Secretariat General decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a study on Online Financial Dealings.

A joint committee composed from Shari'ah Committees (1) and (2) held a meeting in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on 18 Safar 1428 A.H., coresponding to 8 March 2006 A.D. The joint committee discussed the study, and asked the consultant to introduce necessary changes in the light ofthe discussions and observations ofthe meeting.

In a further  meeting of the joint  committee, held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 24 Rabi' II,  1428  A.H., coresponding  to 11  May 2007 A.D., the draft of the standard was discussed and the consulted was requested to introduce  necessary amendments  in the light of the discussions and observations ofthe meeting.

In  its meeting No.  (19)  held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah,  on 26-30
Sha'ban 1428 A.H., corresponding to 8-12 September 2007 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed the amendments made by the joint committee meeting and introduced the changes which it deemed necessary.

In its meeting No. (20) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain, on 4--8 Safar
1429 A.H., corresponding to  11-15 February  2008  A.D., the  Shari'ah Board discussed  once again the draft standard and introduced further changes.



956




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings

The Secretarial General ofAAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 24 Safar 1430 A.H., coresponding to 19 February 2009 A.D. More than 30 participants attended the session as representatives of central banks, institutions, and accounting firms. The session was also attended by Shari'ah scholars, university teachers and other interested parties. Several observations  were made  in the  session, and  duly responded  to by the members of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2).

In its meeting No.  (23) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on Thursday
- Saturday 15-17 Rabi' I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 12-15 March 2009
A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the amendments suggested by the public hearing, introduced the changes that it deemed necessary and adopted the standard.






































957





Shari'ah Stan dard No. (38): Onlin e Finan cial Dealin gs





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


The basis for permissibility of launching  commercial websites if such sites are free from impermissible practices is the fact that in principle, transactions in any form are allowed,  unless they lead to commitment of an impermissible act. Moreover, launching of such sites serves the interests of a large number of people in this era, and thus, conforms to the underlying mission of Sharf'ah.
• Permissibility of concluding online financial contracts is due to the fact that such contracts do not involve any impermissible aspect. They carry no difference from traditional contracts except in that the means used for their conclusion is different. If, in principle, contracts as such are allowed as long as they observe the rules of transactions  in Shari'ah, it is only natural that the means whereby these contracts are concluded become allowed as long as they conform to permissible rules of contracting.
• Concluding online contracts through audio or audiovisual communica• tion between the two parties is classified under the category ofcontracts concluded in the presence of the two parties, because in such online contracts both parties are in fact present at the same time, although not in the same place. Therefore, simultaneous presence ofthe two parties in terms of time, which constitutes the prerequisite meant by coincidence ofpresence, is fulfilled at the time ofexchanging offer and acceptance. In  this  connection  the  International   Islamic  Fiqh  Academy  issued a resolution about the Shari'ah ruling on concluding contracts through the modern  means  of communication.  The text of the resolution  is as follows:  "If any two parties  enter into a contract  at the same time while they are in different places --  this includes contracting  through

(2) See: "Fath Al-Qadir" [3: 190-192]; "HashiyatAl-Dusuqi 'Ala AI-Sharh AL-Kabir" [3: 5]; "Maughni
AL-Muhtaj" [2: 5]; "AL-Maughni" [3: 481]; and see "AL-Madkhal AL-Fiqhi AI-'Am" [1: 348].



958




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Onlin e Financial Dealin gs

telephone and wireless devices - contracting between these two parties is considered as contracting between two present parties  Needless to say, there is no difference between contracting through a telephone call, and contracting through online voice communication.
When  the  contract  is concluded through  written  communication,  by e-mail, or through access to site, it shall be classified as a contract signed in the absence ofthe two parties. This ruling is based on the fact that exchange of offer and acceptance in this  case takes place without  simultaneous presence ofthe two parties. In this regard the Al Baraka Seminar on Islamic Economics issued a resolution stating that "According to Shari'ah, when an online contract is signed between two parties who are not in the same place, it is considered as a contract between two absent parties ifneither of the two parties can hear the voice ofthe other. Consequently such contract should become subject to the Sharf'ah rulings on message contracting!
• The ruling that the offering party does not have the right to retreat from his offer within the period specified by the seller for validity of the offer is based on the viewpoint of some Maliki scholars who believe that if an offer is announced to be valid for a specific period it should remain valid throughout that period. This viewpoint has been emphasized by Al• Hattab quoting Abu Bakar Al-Arabi."In this regard also The International Islamic Fiqh Academy issued a resolution emphasizing the following: "When the offering party issues a term-offer through these devices, he is committed to keep his offer during the specified period. He does not have the right to retreat from it?9
When the offering party sends the electronic message through  website or e-mail without  indicating  all the rights and commitments  relating to the contract  in question, or when he stipulates a condition  that he should have the right ofwithdrawal  even if the message is accepted, the

(3) Resolution No. 52 (3/6).
(4) The 19 AI Baraka Seminar on Islamic Economics, held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, on 6-7 Ramadan 1420 A.H., corresponding to 2-3 December 2000 A.D.
(5) See:  "Mawahib Al-Jalil" by AI-Hattab [4:  241]. This viewpoint has been adopted by a number of civil laws, and is known as "Term Offer': See article (98) ofthe Jordanian Civil Law and article (93) of the Syrian Civil Law.
(6) Resolution No. 52 (3/6).



959





Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online  Financial  Dealings

message is not considered as an offer, because from a Sharf'ah point of view an offer should be categorically obvious and cannot bear any other meaning.
■  The ruling  that  irrespective  of the method  of contracting  an online contract is considered to be valid since the time when the other party accepts the offer and whether the offering party has come to know that or not,  is based  on the fact that  Sharf'ah  scholars define contract  as "the concordance oftwo wills. Therefore as soon as the accepting party declares his  consent  concordance  between  the two wills takes place and the contract  becomes valid.    A resolution  issued in this regard by the International Islamic Fiqh Academy states: "When a contract is to be signed, through  a written message or a messenger, between two absent parties who are not in the same place and neither  of them can see or hear the other - a case which includes contracting through telex, fax and PC screens - the validity of such contract starts as soon as the concerned party receives and accepts the offer.(
■  The ruling that possession in the strict Shari'ah sense takes place when the purchaser, after signing the contract, downloads the computer software or the data or any other good of this type from the website to his pc, is based on the fact that possession takes place actually and constructively when the sold object is released and disposition is facilitated for the buyer. Possession of objects differs according to the type of the object in question and how its possession is normally perceived. In this respect a resolution has been issued by the International Islamic Fiqh Academy regarding possession and its forms, especially the recent ones.(
■  Prohibition of trespassing commercial websites and data theft is derived from prohibition ofall forms ofencroaching upon rights ofothers because Allah, the Almighty, says: {"...but transgress not the limits. Truly, Allah likes not the transgressors.}.A    Moreover, websites have financial worth, and are considered as private rights of their owners. Trespassing of such

(7) See:  "Fath Al-Qadir" [3:  190-92];  "Hashiyat Al-Dusuqi 'Ala AI-Sharh AL-Kabir" [3: 5];
"Mughni Al-Muhtaj" [2: 5]; and  "Al-Maughni" [3: 481].
(8) See:  "Bada 'i' AI-Sana'i" [6: 2994]  and  "Hashiyat Ibn 'Abidin" [7: 26].
(9) Resolution  No. 52 (3/6). (10) Resolution No. 53 (4/6).
(11)  [Al-Baqarah  (The Cow):190].



960




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings

sites may result in financial harm for their owners. In this regard the International  Islamic Fiqh Academy issued a resolution emphasizing prohibition of transgression against trade name, trade address, trademark and all other similar rights.(3
• Acceptability of adopting the electronic signature as a means ofverifying the identities of dealers if such means is recognizable by the prevailing rules and regulations is based on the need to avoid the harm that could arise from online forgery in the dealers' identities. In addition to that, adopting electronic signature does not constitute an impermissible practice. In fact Shari'ah encourages the use of technological means to preserve peoples' wealth, because preservation of wealth constitutes one of the main five aims (Maqasid)  of Shari'ah.
■  The ruling that when forgery or an error is committed with regard to the personality or characteristics of one of the two parties, the other party has the right to terminate  the contract is based on the fact that such an incident can influence the consent of the deceived party. According to Sharf'ah the consent ofthe two parties is the fundamental prerequisite of contracting. This fact has been emphasized by the majority of Shari'ah scholars.
■  The ruling that the state has to assume control upon  online adhesion contracts  -  which  are characterized with  launching  of public  offers, uniform details, imposed terms and conditions, provision ofindispensible commodities or usufructs  and monopoly of supply -  is based on the general texts of Shari'ah which instruct people to avoid harm and achieve justice.
• If a contract is concluded on the basis of describing the object sold, or depending on the fact that the buyer has previously seen the object, or on presentation of a model resembling the object; whereas at the time of delivery the sold object is found to be different, the buyer should have the option of terminating the contract for false description. This ruling is based on the need for preservation of the rights of the two parties of the contract, as has been emphasized by the majority of Fiqh scholars.

(12) Resolution No. (5), 5 Session 1408 A.H. - 1988 A.D.
(13) See:  "AL-Mawsuah Al-Fiqhiyyah", the term Rida, Vol. (22).



961




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Internet

A cross-border  devise of communication between computer networks.

Website

Information stored in the form of pages, while each page contains a set of certain type of information  formed up by a page designer by using special symbols. For browsing ofthe pages, software ofinternet browser is requested, so as to resolve the symbols and issue orders for page display.

Internet Service Provider

The service provider  is the party  (institution)  which provides lines of internet access to beneficiaries on the basis of subscription contracts or any other arrangement, against a specific fee.

Electronic Signature

The electronic signature is data in the form of letters, figures, symbols, signs or any other  form, embodied  in or attached to or liked with an in• formation  message through  electronic, digital, phonic or any other format The electronic signature has a style which allows specification of the distinct identity of the signatory, so that the signature can be verified and the content of the message is approved.

Electronic Message

The data and information published or exchanged  through electronic devices such as internet,  telex, fax and other similar means.









962






















