Shari'ah Standard No. (36)



Impact of Contingent
Incidents on Commitments












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                             909
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................        910

1. Scope of the Standard..............................................................................       910
2. Definition of Contingent Incidents........................................................       910
3. Types of Contingent Incidents................................................................        910
4. Contingencies Leading to Amendment  of the Contract                           910
5. Contingencies Which Constitute External Reasons for Termination
of the Contract..........................................................................................       911
6. Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................       913
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        914
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        915
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard.....................................       917
Appendix (c):  Definitions.............................................................................   918
























907








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to illustrate the contingent incidents which come suddenly upon commitments and cause deviation from stipulated results.








































909





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (36): Impact  of Contingent  Incidents on Commitments





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers the contingent incidents encountered in honoring the  commitments  that  stem  from  application  of Islamic modes  of financing and investment by Islamic financial institutions  (Institution/ Institutions).It also covers the effects ofsuch incidents on commitments.

The Standard, however,  does not cover defects of will or the conducts that result from mutual consent of the two parties.

2. Definition  of Contingent Incidents

Contingent  incidents in this standard refer to those incidents which occur suddenly and cause significant influence on commitments  that are properly  stipulated.  Therefore,  contingent  incidents are different from defects of will, which exist since the time of signing the contract, although their  impact  occurs later on. Contingent  incidents  are also different from termination  of commitments  on mutual consent of the two parties or as per the desire ofany ofthem; when a party is entitled to such right by virtue of the contract.

3. Types of Contingent Incidents

From the standpoint of its influence, a contingent incident can be either of the type that necessitates amendments  in the contract, or the type which constitutes an external reason for termination ofthe contract.

4. Contingencies  Leading to Amendment of the Contract

The impact ofsuch contingencies is confinedto necessitating amendments in the contract rather than leading to its complete termination. Practical examples of such contingencies include the following among others:

(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



910





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (36): Impact  of Contingent  Incidents on Commitments

4/1  Levy of custom duties or taxes after signing the contract. Such inci• dent affects the commitment of the party who has to bear the new obligations by virtue oflaw or as per the stipulations ofthe contract.

4/2 Change in the prices of the commodities  used in implementation of a contract in a way that subjects the contractor  to serious harm. Actual harm  in this case can be removed  through  reconciliation, arbitration  or legal arrangements.

4/3  Prevention ofimportation ofthe goods to be delivered in fulfillment of a Murabahah or Ijarah contract. The actual harm caused to the client or the Institution can, in this case, be removed by resort to reconciliation, arbitration or law.

4/4 Change in laws leading to more financial commitments  to be borne by one of the two parties. Determination ofthe party who shall bear the additional burden can be reached by resort to law or as per the stipulations ofthe contract.

5. Contingencies  Which Constitute External Reasons for Termination of the Contract

This type ofcontingencies leads to termination ofcommitments without intervention of any of the two parties. Bearing of the consequences in this case is to be assigned to the competent party, as when an owner has to bear the consequences relating to what he owns. Examples of such contingencies include, among others:

5/1  When delivery becomes impossible or useless

In this case the fulftllment  of the commitment becomes impossible or ofno use; as when the commitment to supply the requirements of a conference could not be fulfilled before holding the conference. In such case the commitment shall become null and void if:

5/1/1 Failure to honor the commitment is absolutely inevitable.

5/1/2 Failure to honor  the commitment originates  from objective rather than personal reasons.

5/1/3 Failure to honor the commitment is caused by an external party.



911





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (36): Impact  of Contingent  Incidents on Commitments

5/2  Total or partial damage of the object of commitment

Ifthe object of commitment  is damaged before being delivered to the committing party, the loss should be borne by the committed party. Similarly,  when  the commitment  object is completely damaged due to an act of the committing party, that party  should bear the loss. In case of partial damage of the object of commitment  before actual or legal delivery to the committing party, and if the damage is caused by a heavenly factor (Sabab Samawi} which the committed partly can by no means avoid, the committing party should have the right of option.

5/3  Entitlement to the object of commitment

Ifthe object of commitment turned  out to be owned by someone else other the committed  party, the committing  party  becomes entitled to compensation.  If the object  of commitment is partly  owned by someone  else the commitment in that part  becomes null and void, and the committing  party  shall have the right of option with regard to  accepting  or  declining  the  remaining  part  of the  commitment object. The committing  party  may choose to accept the remaining part  as part  of his compensation or he may terminate  the contract due to fragmentation of delivery.

5/4 Termination of commitment  due to excuses

When  the  emergence  of an  incidental  excuse  in  Ijarah  leads  to abnormal  harm,  the  harmed  party  has the  right  to terminate  the contract. The party who encounters the incident may also terminate the contract  if his excuse is obvious. If acceptability of the excuse is doubtful  the issue may be resolved by mutual  agreement,  or resort to law. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (9) on Ijarah or ljarah Muntahiah Bittamleek; and Shari'ah Standard No.  (34) on Hiring of Persons]

5/5  Jawa'ih (calamities)

The term Jawa'ih refers to any incident (other than human acts) which cannot be avoided even if known.  The effects of such incidents are • originally - noticeable in selling offruits and other agricultural products, where the occurrence of an incident of this type leads to discounting the



912





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (36): Impact  of Contingent  Incidents on Commitments

price in proportion to the damage in the product. An example of this can also be seen in the "ljarah Muntahia Bittamleek Contract'. In this case the amount of rent in excess of the normal rent of similar property is  dropped when ownership  cannot be transferred to the lessor for a reason which the lessee cannot stop. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (9) on ljarah or ljarah Muntahia Bittamleek, item 8/8]

6. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 17 Rabi' I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 15
March 2009 A.D.










































913





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (36): Impact  of Contingent  Incidents on Commitments





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted the Standard on Impact of Contingent Incidents on Commitments in its meeting No. (23) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on Thursday- Saturday 15-17 Rabi' I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 12-13 March 2009 A.D.











































914





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (36): Impact  of Contingent  Incidents on Commitments





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (14) held on 21-23 Rabi' I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 30 April - 2 May 2005 A.D., in Dubai (U. A. E.), the Sharf'ah Board decided to issue a Shari'ah Standard on Impact of Contingent Incidents on Commitments.

On 29 Jumada I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 6 July 2005 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee decided to commission a consultant to prepare a study on Impact of Contingent Incidents on Commitments.

The study was discussed in a joint meeting of the Shari'ah Standards
Committees (1) and (2), held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 8-9 Rabi' I,
1427 A.H., corresponding to 6-7 April 2006 A.D. The Joint Committee then advised the consultant to introduce the necessary changes in the Standard, in the light of the discussions and observations of the meeting.

The revised draft ofthe Standard was discussed in another joint meeting of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2), held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on Thursday 21 Sha'ban 1427 A.H., corresponding to 14 September
2006 A.D. The consultant was again advised to introduce changes in the
Standard as per the discussions and observations ofthe meeting.

In its meeting No.  (20) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on 4-8 Safar
1429 A.H., corresponding to 11-15 February 2008 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the Changes in the Standard which had been made by the joint meeting of Shari'ah Standards Committees  (1) and (2), and introduced changes that it deemed necessary.

The Secretarial General ofAAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom ofBahrain on 24 Safar 1430 A.H., corresponding to 19 February2009 A.D.



915





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (36): Impact  of Contingent  Incidents on Commitments

More than 30 participants attended the session as representatives of central banks, Institutions, and accounting firms. The session was also attended by Shari'ah scholars, university teachers and other interested parties. Several observations were made in the session, and duly responded to by the members of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2).

In its meeting No.  (23) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on Thursday
- Saturday 15-17 Rabi' I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 12-15 March 2009
A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed the amendments that had been suggested in the public hearing, introduced changes that it deemed necessary and adopted the Standard.









































916





Sharf'ah Standard No. (36): Impact of Contingent Incidents on Commitments





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


• Permissibility of amending the commitment  to absorb the impacts of contingent incidents is based on the fact that in such cases Muslims should strive for appropriate disposition without rushing to termination of the commitment. This rule is adopted by the various schools of Fiqh with regard to external incidents which take place without the interven• tion of any of the two parties.
■  The ruling that the commitment shall become null and void if its ful•
fillment has become useless is based on the fact that implementation of a useless commitment is an act of futility, while there is no room for futility in Shari'ah legislation as indicated by AI-Shatibi and others.
■  The basis for the ruling that commitment shall become ineffective when
the object of the contract turns out to be owned by someone else other than the committed party, is that unlawful seizure is unrecognizable as a basis ofownership. The Prophet (peace be upon him) is reported to have said: An extorter is indebted with what he takes until he returns it back•
• The basis for the rulings relating to Jawa'ih (calamities) is the Hadith (Prophetic tradition)  which states:  "The Prophet (peace be upon  him) hasforbidden Bay' al-Sinin (sale ofagricultural producefor many years to come), and permitted  value discounts on calamities".  Therefore, rulings can be derived from this Hadith for similar cases when the object of the contract is lost due to an inevitable incident





(2) Related by Ahmad in his "Musnad"; "Ashab Al-Sunan'; and Al-Hakim in his "Mustadrak",
quoting Samrah, and "AI-Fath AL-Kabir" [2: 232].
(3) This Hadith has been related by Muslim,  Abu Dawud and Al-Nasa'i:  "Majma' Al• Zawa 'id" [1: 703].



917





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (36): Impact  of Contingent  Incidents  on Commitments





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Contingencies  Relating to Legal Competence

Incidental change in personal traits which leads to loss of competence and induce mal-disposition.

Defects of Will

Hidden matters which coincide with the inception of the contract and entail amendments of rights and duties when they occur.

Al-Jawa'ih

Catastrophes which hit the produce and damage it partially or totally, such as storms and the like.
Contingent Incidents  (force majeure)

Abnormal  incidents  which justify procedures  that  are not  allowed under normal  circumstances. Examples of such incidents include wars, internal unrest, and natural catastrophes." Describing such incidents as "heavenly" is to indicate the inability of human  beings to avoid them. Examples of such incidents include,  for instance,  insanity forgetfulness and unconsciousness,

Heavenly Incidents

Incidents which human beings cannot avoid. It includes also the strict directives of Shari'ah in which the slaves of Allah, the Almighty, have no room for choice.6

(4) "Mu'jam Mustalahat AI-Shari'ah Wa Al-Qanun", Dr. Abdul-Wahid Karam (P. 676). (5) "Mu'jam Mustalahat Usul Al-Fiqh, Dr. Qutb Mustafa Sano (P 305).



918





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (36): Impact  of Contingent  Incidents on Commitments

Istihqaq (Entitlement)

Occurrence  of the fact that someone else has the full right of total or partial ownership on the sold property."° It can also be defined as existence of other verifiable claims of right on the property which one party pledged to deliver to the other.(












































(6) "AL-Khiyar Wa Atharuh  Fi AI-'Uqud" (P. 478).
(7) "M'jam Mustalahat Al-Shari'ah  Wa Al-Qanun"  (P. 37).



919

























