Shari'ah Standard No. (32)




Arbitration












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                             793
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................        794

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               794
2. Definition of Arbitration                                                                           794
3. Forms of Resorting to Arbitration and Arbitration Parties.            794
4. Permissibility of Arbitration                                                                     794
5. Shari'ah Status of Arbitration..................................................................       795
6. Basic Elements of Arbitration............................................................       795
7. Scope ofArbitration (What Should Be Resolved Through Arbitration
in Shari'ah).................................................................................................       795
8. Characteristics  and Appointment of the Arbitrator                        796
9. Arbitration Document.............................................................................        797
10. Methods of Judgment, Procedures and Proving in Arbitration.......       798
11. Issuance  of the Arbitration Verdict.................................................       799

12. Communication  and Validity of the Arbitration Decision...............       801
13. Implementation of the Verdict (the Form of Implementation),
or Its Revocation.....................................................................................       801
14. Arbitration Expenses and the Arbitrator's Fees...........................       802
15. Date of Issuance of the Standard.....................................................       802
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        803
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        804
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard.....................................       806
Appendix (c):  Definitions.............................................................................         807







791








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to define Arbitration and indicate its conditions and scope. It also discusses the Shari'ah status ofarbitrators, arbitration document and verdicts, methods of initiating and implementing arbitration, and how arbitration  is implemented  in Islamic financial institutions  (Institution/ Institutions).(I)






























(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



793





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard covers arbitration as practiced in financial transactions and other activities and relationships which take place among institutions, or between Institutions  and their clients or employees or other parties; whether inside or outside the host country ofthe institution.

2. Definition  of Arbitration

2/1  Arbitration is an agreement between two parties or more to designate an external  party  for resolving  a dispute  between  them  through issuance of a binding verdict.

2/2 Arbitration in this standard  refers to (Islamic Arbitration) which observes the rules and conditions  of Shari'ah.

3. Forms of Resorting to Arbitration and Arbitration Parties

3/1  Arbitration can be sought through  agreement of the two parties at the time of dispute, or in fulfillment ofa previous agreement between them to seek arbitration instead of resorting to law. Arbitration can also be legally imposed on the two parties.

3/2 Seeking Islamic arbitration should be stipulated in the agreements in which the two parties cannot be forced to resort to laws that contradict with Sharf'ah.

3/3  Arbitration parties are the two (or more) conflicting parties who seek arbitration.

4. Permissibility of Arbitration

Arbitration is permissible whether  it is sought by two natural  or legal persons, or by a natural person and a legal person.



794





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration

5. Shari'ah Status of Arbitration

5/1  Arbitration is binding in the following cases:

a) When it is stipulated as a condition in the contract

b) When the two parties agree on seeking arbitration on dispute, and pledge to observe its verdicts.

5/2  Arbitration  is not  binding  for an arbitrator  who  is not  entitled to remuneration. Such an arbitrator  can terminate  himself after accepting the task. If the arbitrator  is paid for his job, arbitration becomes  binding  for  him.  In  this  latter  case,  if the  arbitrator terminates  himself after accepting the  task, he should bear  any actual harm that may result from his act. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (34) on Hiring of Persons]

6. Basic Elements of Arbitration

6/1  The basic element ofarbitration is its form, which refers to the process of exchange of offer and acceptance between the two parties seeking arbitration, and the arbitrator.

6/2 Valid arbitration has to fulfill the following requirements:

6/2/1  Existence ofdispute between two parties or more, around a per•
missible right.

6/2/2 Agreement between the two parties on arbitration, and their mutual consent on accepting the verdicts of the arbitrator.

6/2/3 Acceptance of the arbitrator to do the arbitration task.

7. Scope of Arbitration  (What Should Be Resolved Through Arbitration
in Shari'ah)

7/1  Arbitration is permissible in whatever a party is entitled to relinquish his right in.

7/2 Arbitration is impermissible in the following cases:

7/2/1 What constitutes a right of Allah,  Glory be to Him,  such as
Hudud (Sharf'ah penalties).



795





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration

7/2/2  Cases that entail proving  or disproving  of a verdict that con•
cerns a third party.

7/3 When  the arbitrator issues a verdict  on an issue that  should  not be resolved through arbitration; his verdict is null and void.

8. Characteristics and Appointment of the Arbitrator

8/1  An Arbitrator shall have the full eligibility for performing his task.

8/2  In principle, an arbitrator shall be a Muslim. However, a non-Muslim arbitrator could be appointed when acute need so requires, in order to  arrive  at a Shari'ah-accepted verdict  (in  this  regard, item  11/1 below shall be observed).
8/3  It is permissible to appoint one arbitrator or more, and - preferably  • the number of arbitrators  is to be odd, otherwise, the two parties (the seekers of arbitration) may appoint  a chairman for the  arbitration panel,  whose  vote  shall be  the  casting  vote  when  other  votes are equal.

8/4 Each of the  dispute parties  may appoint  one arbitrator, and the ap• pointed  arbitrators may appoint  a final arbitrator  if they are permit• ted to do so by the disputing parties.

8/5  When  any of the two parties  refrains from appointing  an arbitrator from his own side as per the contract, the other party has the right to resort to the judiciary for appointing  an arbitrator to represent the refraining party, provided that the arbitration condition in the contract does not specify another way for appointing such arbitrator.

8/6 The arbitrator has no right to appoint an alternate arbitrator to replace him, without the permission  of the party that appointed him, because he has been  accepted as an arbitrator  in person. However, the arbi• trator  could have this right if arbitration  is assigned to an Institution or an arbitration  committee whose members  are appointed with due consideration for its declared conditions of selection.

8/7 An agent or a Mudarib does not have the right of accepting arbitration, except with the consent of the principal for the agent and the owners of



796





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration

the capital for the Mudarib, or on the basis ofa clause in the Mudarabah conditions such as conditions in investment accounts. No one should become part of the arbitration  on behalf of an institution that has a legal personality except its official representative.

9. Arbitration Document

9/1 The arbitration  document  originates from agreement  of the two parties ofthe dispute on arbitration, and acceptance ofthe arbitrator to perform  the task, and is called (the arbitration contract) or (the arbitration agreement).

9/2 The arbitration  document  should include the names  of the two parties of the dispute, the name of the arbitrator, the overall subject of dispute, the date specified for arbitration and the fees payable to the arbitrator if any.

9/3 The arbitration  condition  is the commitment  of the two parties of the arbitration  contract  or agreement to resolve their disputes through arbitration. Ifsuch condition is stipulated in any agreement or contract, there will remain no need for agreement on arbitration at the time of dispute.

9I4 The arbitrator should apply the rulings of Shari'ah. If he is obliged to apply a certain law, he should still not violate the rulings of Shari'ah.

9/5 The two parties  of the arbitration  have the right to impose  any permissible limitation on the arbitration so as to serve a permissible purpose  of their  own.  Permissible  limitations  may  include, for instance:  issuance of the verdict within  a specific time limit  or in view of a certain School of Fiqh or a certain law that does not contradict  the  Shari'ah; or consultation  with  exerts specified in name or by description. In the latter case, however, the arbitrator is not bound to accept the viewpoints of the experts.

9/6 When the period specified for arbitration expires without issuance of the verdict, the arbitrator becomes terminated, unless the two parties agree on extending the period.  The arbitration period starts at the



797





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration

time when the arbitration document has been signed by all the parties seeking  arbitration, and  ends  up at the time  when  the arbitration verdict has been signed by all these parties.

9/7 It is permissible to conclude  a verbal  arbitration  contract, however, Institutions should document the arbitration verdict in writing.

9/8 Acceptance ofarbitration  does not require attestation in the arbitration document, though such attestation is preferable.
10. Methods  of Judgment, Procedures and Proving in Arbitration

10/1  The arbitrator is free to use any legally accepted method ofjudgment, such as confession, evidence (attestation), oath taking, or refraining from  oath   (Nukul),  while  he  should   not  make  judgment  on the  basis  of his  own  opinion.  When  the  arbitrator  rejects  an attestation, his rejection  should not constitute  a reason for denial of that attestation in other  arbitrations or in the judiciary,  unless the same attestation is also rejected by the judiciary.

10/2  The arbitrator has the right to request all the documents  and proofs relating  to the  dispute,  or  copies of such  documents  verified  in comparison to originals. He has to show such documents to the two parties so as to seek their opinions on them. The arbitrator has also the right to request verbal or written statements from the two parties of the dispute or the witnesses, and to consult experts if needed.

10/3  The Arbitrator is neither  required  to follow the procedural rules of the judiciary, nor is he obliged to observe laws, unless such laws are part of public order.

10/4The arbitrator is not supposed to stick to the legally stipulated rules  of evidence. Instead, he has the  right  to make  use of any other evidence,  provided that  the  acceptance of that  evidence does not contradict with the rules of Shari'ah.

10/5  The arbitration  verdict  is issued by consensus or majority and in the case of equal votes the party  which includes the chairman  is considered to have the casting vote, unless some other arrangements are  proposed   in  the  arbitration  document  or  the  rules  of the arbitrating entity.



798





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration

11. Issuance of the Arbitration  Verdict

11/1  A valid arbitration decision should lead to a verdict that conform to the rules of Shari'ah.

11/2  The final arbitration decision should resolve all points of dispute and lead to fair specification ofthe rights ofthe arbitration parties. When  arbitration  ends up with partial resolution of the points of dispute, arbitration is incomplete since it has not enabled the disputing parties to avoid resorting to legal suing. In this case, the disputing parties have the right to demand a further decision from the arbitrator so as to resolve the remaining points of dispute.

11/3 Arbitration  should not go beyond the subject matter of dispute, because tackling ofany further issue does not fall within the man• date ofthe arbitrator, unless the two parties ofthe dispute agree to add it.

11/4 The arbitrator  has the right, subject to his own discretion or on request of the disputing parties,  to issue a commentary on the arbitration  decision, or introduce  corrections  for any material mistakes that might be involved therein.

11/5  The arbitrator can issue his decision in a number ofpreparatory or partial decisions, or identify the responsibility without estimating indemnification.

11/6 It is preferable that the Shari'ah or basis of the arbitration  de• cision be  mentioned  (reasoning),  yet this  does not  constitute a condition for valid arbitration, unless the law so requires.

11/7 In principle the arbitration  decision is to be issued in a session attended by the arbitrators if they are many (or most ofthem, after invitation). It can also be issued by circulation among members after being prepared by the final arbitrator, or the chairman ofthe arbitration  panel,  or any other authorized  member.  In the case of issuance by circulation, consensus among members should be reached.



799





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration

11/8 The arbitration decision is to be issued under the signature of all members ofthe arbitration panel (when they are many) including those  who raise objections  against it,  and  objecting  members should be allowed to state their objections on the document. The arbitration  decision may also be issued under  the signature of most ofthe members, after indicating the reasons that made some members refrain from signing. Nevertheless, the decision has to be issued at the knowledge of all members as per the minutes of the session convened for that purpose.

11/9 The arbitration decision includes: the text of the verdict; names, identities and addresses ofthe two parties ofthe dispute; reference to the date and number of the arbitration document; summary of the subject matter ofdispute; claims ofthe two parties ofthe dispute and the supporting  documents; names of witnesses and experts whose help was sought if any; names ofarbitrators, date and place of issuing the verdict; signatures of arbitrators; signatures of the parties of dispute if possible; and reasons of the decision reached unless the arbitration document comprises exemption from such reasoning and there is no legal condition to that effect.

11/10 The arbitration decision should not necessarily be issued in the presence of the two parties of the dispute, although it is better to be so for shortening the procedure of communicating it to them.

11/11 It would be better to include in the conclusion of the arbitration decision a request or a recommendation to the judiciary or the concerned legal authorities to use every permissible means for its implementation.

11/12 The arbitration  decision should not necessarily meet the consent of the  two parties  of the  dispute.  It  should  spontaneously  be binding to them, unless it is revoked for being counter to the rules of Shari'ah or public order.

11/12 The arbitration decision can be issued on the basis of reconciliation as prescribed by Sharf'ah or on the basis of consensual agreement.



800





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration

12. Communication and Validity of the Arbitration Decision

12/1  The arbitration decision shall be communicated to the two parties of the dispute through the normal procedures, unless a specific way of communication  is identified in the arbitration document or by any other legal authority.

12/2  The validity ofthe arbitration decision does not require attestation ofwitnesses on communication of the decision to the two parties of the dispute or the consent of these parties to it, although such attestation is recommendable for avoiding conflict.

12/3  The validity ofthe arbitration decision does not require its official registration or submission to the concerned court, yet this has to be done ifit is required for legitimizing the implementation of the decision. In that case, the date specified for finalization of such procedure should be observed.

12/4  If the arbitration decision is written in more than one language, the language to be adopted in case of dispute should be specified.

12/5  A signed copy of the arbitration  decision shall be handed  over to each of the two parties of the dispute, while each one of the arbitrators (if many) shall retain a signed copy as well.

13. Implementation of the Verdict (the Form of Implementation), or Its
Revocation

13/1  In principle, the two parties of the dispute should implement the arbitration verdict willingly. In case one party refrains from doing so, the other party has the right to present the verdict to judiciary for execution. Therefore, arbitration should not be resorted to if its verdict cannot be implemented.

13/2 For legitimizing the  execution  of the  arbitration  verdict,  it is permissible to approach courts that do not observe the rules of Shari'ah.

13/3  The arbitrator does not have the right to retreat from his verdict, unless when he declares that he has committed  a mistake in it.



801





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration

However,  in  case of committing a mistake, the  arbitrator can cancel or amend  his verdict  in view of the  rules  of the  Islamic Shari'ah and in the way that would ensure justice.

14. Arbitration  Expenses and the Arbitrator's Fees

14/1  It is permissible  for  the  arbitrator,  if he  is not  a volunteer  or a government employee designated for doing arbitration, to receive fees for the task. The amount  or percentage of such fees should be indicated  in the conditions  of arbitration  in case of Institutional arbitration,  or agreed upon in the arbitration document.

14/2  When the arbitration process leads to incurring of any expenses, such as transportation  expenses for the arbitrator, witnesses and experts, or typing expenses, or fees payable to the arbitrator, the arbitration decision must specify the party that should bear them.  It should be noted here that the expenses pertaining to the application of any of the disputing parties should be borne by that party alone, whereas common expenses are to be shared by the dispute parties, unless it is proved that one party has been deliberately intending to cause harm to the other through such expenses. In this latter case, the party that has been intending to cause harm  should bear such expenses. All these preceding points hold true in the absence of a prior agreement which assigns the payment of the expenses to a specific party or to the condemned party.

15. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 30 Shaban  1428 A.H., corresponding to
12 September  2007 A.D.















802





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted the Standard on Arbitration in its meeting
No. (19) held on 26-30 Sha'ban 1428 A.H., corresponding to 8-12 September
2007 A.D., in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.













































803





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 12 Rajah 1427 A.H., corresponding to 6 August 2006 A.D., the Shari'ah
Board decided to issue a standard on Arbitration.

On 21  Sha'ban  1427 A.H., corresponding to 14 September 2006 A.D., a joint meeting of the Shari'ah  Standards  Committees  (1)  and (2) was held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, and discussed the study. The meeting requested the consultant to introduce necessary amendments in the light of the discussions and observations of the joint committee members. The meeting discussed also the Standard on Arbitration which was ready in the same session, and introduced necessary changes in it, in the light of the discussions that took place.

In its meeting No. (17) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, on 27 Shawwal
- 1  Dhul-Qa'dah 1427 A.H., corresponding to 18-23 November 2006 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed the changes in the standard which had been made by the joint meeting of Sharf'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2), and introduced changes that it deemed necessary.

The Secretarial General of AAOIFI held a public hearing in the King•
dom of Bahrain on 18 Safar 1428 A.H., corresponding  to 8 March 2007
A.D. More than  30 participants  attended  the session as representatives of central banks,  institutions,  and accounting  firms.  The session was also attended  by Sharf'ah scholars, university teachers and other inter• ested parties. Several observations were made in the session, and duly responded to by the members of the Sharf'ah Standards Committees ( 1) and (2).



804





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration

In its meeting No. (19) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, on 26 Sha'ban
- 1  Ramadan 1428 A.H., corresponding to 8-12 September 2007 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the amendments that had been suggested in the public hearing, introduced changes that it deemed necessary and adopted the Standard.

















































805





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


■  In one sense, arbitration seems like agency on behalf of the two parties, although it also seems to involve private custodianship in another sense.
• According to Shari'ah arbitration could take place verbally, yet it is prefe• rable - for Institutions in particular - to document it in writing. In order to be legally accepted, arbitration needs to be written and signed by the arbitrators and the parties of the dispute.
In principle, selection of arbitrators should be subject to the same Sharf'ah
conditions for selection ofjudges including non-partiality. In case ofneces• sity, some of these conditions could be dropped such as the condition that the arbitrator should be a Muslim. Nevertheless, a non-Muslim arbitrator should not issue a verdict that contradicts with Sharf'ah.






























806





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Sulh (Reconciliation)

It refers to a request ofrelinquishment ofwhat the arbitrators consider to be the right of one ofthe two parties of the dispute. Such request shall not be made to a party who is an agent, unless he is delegated to do reconciliation. Preferably, the issuance of a reconciliation decision is to be based on a clear clause in the arbitration  document  indicating that arbitrators have the right to pursue reconciliation.

Consensual Settlement

It refers to the case when the two parties ofthe dispute agree, outside the arbitration  task, on a settlement  which  they both  accept, and request  the arbitrators  to issue a decision based on that settlement.  The arbitrators  in this case shall concur to the request of the two parties, unless the proposed settlement is impermissible,  or contrary  to public order.

Arbitration Document

It is a document  signed by the two parties to pursue arbitration  on a dis•
pute which has arisen between them.

Arbitration Agreement

It is a prior condition or a contract stipulating resort to arbitration  when dispute arises.

Material Mistakes

It refers to unintentional mistakes in names or numbers, when proofs or documents  indicate the aspects which need correction.

Institutional Arbitration

It is the selection of an Institution that comprises competent arbitrators to resolve the dispute. In this case, there is no need for designating the arbitrator in name.



807

























