Shari'ah Standard No. (41)



Islamic Reinsurance












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface...................................................................................................      1017
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................      1018

1. Scope of the Standard..............................................................................      1018
2. Definition of Reinsurance.......................................................................      1018
3. Shari'ah Status of Reinsurance                                                                1018
4. Key Methods ofReinsurance..................................................................      1019
5. Key Forms of Reinsurance Requests......................................................      1019
6. Controls on Reinsurance with Traditional Reinsurance Companies...     1019
7.  Shari'ah Status of Compensations and Commissions Presented to Is-
lamic Insurance Companies by Traditional Reinsurance Companies...      1020
8. Shari'ah  Controls  on  Practicing  Islamic  Reinsurance  by  Islamic
Reinsurance Companies...........................................................................      1021
9. Financial Gains Received from Islamic Reinsurance Companies......      1021
10. Date of Issuance ofthe Standard.............................................................      1022
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1023
Appendices
Appendix (a):  BriefHistory ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1024
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard...................................       1026
Appendix (c):  Definitions............................................................................       1034
Appendix (d):  A Model Reinsurance Agreement Issued by Islamic
Insurance Company - Jordan................................................      1036













1015








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to illustrate the rules and principles of Shari'ah that govern Islamic reinsurance and indicate the controls which Islamic insur• ance and reinsurance  companies as well as Islamic financial institutions (Institution/Institutions)   should observe in dealing with traditional  in• surance and reinsurance companies. The overall objective of the standard is to facilitate transference of risks and increasing of insurance capacity.




























(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



1017





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers Islamic reinsurance and participation with tradi• tional insurance or reinsurance companies. The Standard does not cover Islamic insurance which has already been covered in a separate standard.

2. Definition of Reinsurance

2/1 Islamic  Reinsurance  refers  to  the  agreement  among  insurance companies, on behalf of the insurance funds under their management, to  devise a mechanism  for  the  avoidance  of part  of the  risks which the insurance  funds may encounter. On the basis of such agreement a reinsurance fund which has a distinct legal personality and independent  financial liability is formed up through  malting contributions  out of the insurance  funds  paid by the insurance clients on the basis ofdonation. The reinsurance fund, thus formed, assumes the task of covering part of the risks encountered by the insurance funds.

2/2 Reinsurance, as described above, constitutes the Islamic alternative for the reinsurance provided by traditional reinsurance companies, which  is based  on  exchange of the  reinsurance  premiums  and compensation, rather than on donation commitments.

3. Shari'ah Status of Reinsurance

3/1  Sharf'ah status oflslamic reinsurance:

3/1/1  It is permissible to reinsure with Islamic reinsurance companies.

3/2  Shari'ah status of reinsurance with traditional reinsurance companies:

It is impermissible for Islamic insurance companies to reinsure with traditional reinsurance companies, except when such reinsurance is sought as a transitional  arrangement  stemming from public need which amounts to necessity.



1018





Shari'ah Standard No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance

4. Key Methods of Reinsurance

With regard to the scope of commitment of the reinsurer, reinsurance can take place through one of the following two forms:

4/1 Selective reinsurance: In this case the insurance  company presents the individual riskwhich constitutes the subject matter ofreinsurance to the reinsurer along with a summary of all the information related to it, so that the reinsurer  can study the information and decide whether to accept the risk or not. The reinsurance company (insurer) becomes committed to what it accepts.

4/2 Comprehensive  reinsurance  (reinsurance  agreement): In this case the reinsurance company assumes the commitment to accept all the risks which fall within the scope of the agreement signed with the insurance company.

5. Key Forms of Reinsurance Requests

5/1  Risk sharing reinsurance: The insurance company in this case seeks reinsurance for a percentage of the insurance policies it issues (50% or 25%), whether  such coverage is within or in excess of its own insurance capacity.

5/2 Excess risk  reinsurance   (beyond  risk  tolerance):  The  insurance company keeps all the insurance policies which it can easily tolerate their risks and seeks reinsurance for those which involve risks that it cannot tolerate.

5/3  Loss reinsurance: According to this type ofreinsurance the reinsurance company assumes the responsibility of bearing the losses beyond the specific limit agreed upon. This form ofreinsurance is widely used in the insurances which involve big amounts.  The insurance company bears, for instance, the first 20 thousand dollars of compensation for the accident, while the reinsurance company bears the rest.

6. Controls on Reinsurance with Traditional Reinsurance Companies

In reinsuring with traditional reinsurance companies, Islamic insurance companies should observe the following controls:



1019





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance

6/1 Islamic insurance  companies  should  reinsure  first with  Islamic reinsurance companies, to the largest possible extent.

6/2 Islamic insurance companies should not keep any cash reserves for ongoing risks, that belong to traditional reinsurance companies and on which interest has to be paid. Nevertheless, an agreement can be reached between the Islamic insurance company and the traditional reinsurance  company in order to specify a certain portion  of the premiums  payable to the traditional  reinsurance  company  to be retained by the Islamic insurance company. The Islamic insurance companycaninvestretainedfunds throughMudarabahor investment agency, where the Islamic insurance company assumes the role of the  Mudarib  and  the  traditional  reinsurance  company  assumes the role of Rab al-Mal When profit is distributed as per the ratios agreed upon, the share of the traditional reinsurance company is to be added to its account with the Islamic insurance company, whereas the share of the profit earned by the Islamic insurance company for performing the investment as an independent  personality is to be added to the account ofthe participants.

6/3 The periods ofthe reinsurance agreements sought by Islamic insur• ance companies from traditional reinsurance companies should be commensurate to the actual need.

6/4 Before signing agreements with traditional reinsurance companies, Is• lamic insurance companies should seek the approval oftheir Sharf'ah Supervisory Boards.

6/5 Islamic insurance companies should stick to the minimum  size of reinsurance  with traditional  reinsurance  companies, and Shari'ah Boards should undertake follow-up in this connection.

7. Shari'ah Status of Compensations and Commissions Presented to Islamic
Insurance Companies by Traditional Reinsurance Companies

7/1  It is permissible for Islamic insurance companies to receive the amounts of the insurance coverage from traditional reinsurance companies.



1020





Shari'ah Standard No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance

7/2 It is impermissible for  an  Islamic  insurance company  to  receive reinsurance commission from  a traditional reinsurance company. Nevertheless,  the Islamic insurance company  has the right to seek premium discounts from the traditional reinsurance company.
7/3 Islamic insurance companies should not accept any redistributions of insurance  surplus forwarded  by traditional reinsurance  companies. Nonetheless, Islamic insurance companies can request premium discounts  from traditional reinsurance  companies.
8. Shari'ah  Controls  on  Practicing  Islamic  Reinsurance  by Islamic
Reinsurance Companies

8/1 Islamic reinsurance companies  should observe the Shari'ah controls on the activities of Islamic insurance companies  indicted  in Sharf'ah Standard No.  (26) on Islamic Insurance,  with  due consideration to the fact that the participants in this case are the insurance companies.

8/2  Formation of a Shari'ah Supervisory Board to supervise the process of establishing the Islamic reinsurance company, verify its contracts and documents,  overview its applications and submit Shari'ah reports on its activities.

8/3 It is permissible for the  Islamic  reinsurance company to provide reinsurance services to traditional insurance companies,  subject  to the following conditions:

1.   The contract  to be used should be the Islamic reinsurance  con•
tract.

2.  There should be no linkage.

3.  Reinsurance  should not involve a Shari'ah prohibited  object.

9. Financial Gains Received from Islamic Reinsurance Companies

All  financial  gains  which  Islamic  insurance   companies  receive  from Islamic reinsurance  companies are considered as lawful gains and should be credited to the account ofpolicyholders (the participant companies of the reinsurance  scheme), as part  of revenues.



1021





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance

10. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 2 Dhul-Qadah 1430 A.H., corresponding to 21 October 2009 A.D.




















































1022





Shari'ah Standard No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance





Adoption of the Standard


The  Shari'ah  Board adopted  the  draft  of the  Standard  on Islamic Reinsurance in its 25th meeting held during  the period  of 2-4 Dhul• Qa'dah 1430 A.H., corresponding to 21-23 October 2009 A.D.













































1023





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No.  (16) held in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawarah,  during the period of 7-12 Jumada I, 1427 A.H., corresponding  to 3-8 June 2006
A.D, the Shari'ah Board decided to issue a Shari'ah Standard on Islamic
Reinsurance.

On  12 Rajah  1427 A.H., corresponding  to 6 August 2005 A.D., the General Secretariat decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Islamic Reinsurance and Participation with Traditional Companies.

In ajoint meeting held in the Kingdom ofBahrain, on 18 Safar 1428 A.H., corresponding to 8 March 2007 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) discussed the study, approved it and required the consultant to prepare the exposure draft ofthe Standard.

In a further joint meeting held in Manama, the Kingdom of Bahrain, on
15 Jumada I, 1428 A.H., corresponding to 31 May 2007 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committees  (1) and  (2)  discussed the  draft of the  Standard and necessary amendments were made in the light of the discussions and observations ofthe meeting.

In its meeting No. (19) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, during the period of26-30 Sha'ban 1428 A.H., corresponding to 8-12 September 2007
A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the draft of the Standard and made the
amendments which it deemed necessary.

The  General  Secretariat  held  a public  hearing  in  the  Kingdom  of
Bahrain,  on  8  Jumada  II,  1429  A.H.,  corresponding  to  12  June  2008
A.D.  The public hearing was attended by more than thirty participants



1024





Shari'ah Standard No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance

representing central banks, institutions, accounting firms, Shari'ah scholars, academics and others interested in this field. The members of the Shari'ah Standards  Committees (1) and (2) duly responded to several comments and observations that were made in the public hearing.

In its meeting No.  (25) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain,  during the period of2-4 Dhul-Qa'dah 1430 A.H., corresponding to 21-23 October 2009
A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the draft of the Standard, incorporated
the necessary amendments that it deemed appropriate,  and adopted the
Standard.











































1025





Shari'ah Standard No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


• Impermissibility of commercial reinsurance is based on the fact that the idea of commercial reinsurance depends on the idea of commercial in• surance and involves Shari'ah-prohibited Gharar. As related by Muslim, Ashab al-Sunan and others, quoting Abu Hurayrah, the Prophet (peace be upon him) prohibited Bay' al-Gharar(aleatory sale). Gharar, as defined by several Fiqh scholars, indicates uncertainty about the outcomes, or the consequences, or end result of something. According to some contem• porary Fiqh scholars Gharar is similar to or part ofbetting or gambling." A number of resolutions on prohibition of Gharar have also been issued by Islamic Fiqh Academies including the Resolution of the Islamic Fiqh Academy-Makkah Al-Mukarramah in its 1398 A.H. Session, endorsing the Resolution of the Supreme Council of the Ulema of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in its 10 Session held in Riyadh on 4 Rabi' II, 1397 A.H., and Resolution No. (9) 9/1 ofthe International Islamic Fiqh Academy.
• Permissibility ofcooperative insurance stems from the fact that cooperative insurance companies are based on cooperation and donation rather than on exchange-based dealings. It is a well-known as Fiqh axiom that Gharar does not affect donation-based contracts.  Permissibility of cooperative insurance can also be derived from several Verses ofthe Glorious Qur'an

(2) "Sahih Muslim", Kitab AL-Buy' [3: 115]; "Sunan Abu Dawud" [2: 22]), (H: 3376); "Sunan Al-Nasa'i" [2:  21]; "Sunan Ibn Majah" [2: 73]; "Sunan AI-Tirmizi"  [3: 532]; "Sunan Al• Darami" [2:  16]);  "AI-Muwatta""  [2:  66]);  "Musnad Ahmad" [1:  201, 2:  367 and  397]; "Sunan Al-Bayhaqi" [5: 22]; and "MusnnafIbn Abu Shaybah" [8:  19], Part 2.
(3) See:  "Sharh AI-'Inayah Ma'a Fath Al-Qadir" [5: 192];  "Tabyin AL-Haqa 'iq" [4: 46]; "AL• Taj  Wa AL-Iklil" [4:  36];  "Fath AI-'Aziz Bi Hamish AL-Majmu"  [8:  127];  "Matalib  Uli AL-Nuha" [3:  25]; "AI-Qawa'id AI-Nuraniyyah, (P. 166); and  "Nazariyyat Al-'Aqd, (P.
224). See also Sheikh Siddiq Al-Darir: His valuable  book on  "Al-Gharar Wa Atharuhu
Fi AL-Uqud", Salih Kamil Lil-Rasail Al-Jami'iyyah, (P 54). (4) See: Dr. Hussein  Hamid:  "AI-Gharar", (P. 72).



1026





Shari'ah Stan dard No.  (41): Islami c Rein surance

and Prophetic Hadiths which instruct people to cooperate. In this regard, a number ofresolutions have been issued by the Islamic Research Academy of Al-Azhar in addition to the Resolution of the Islamic Fiqh Academy
-Makkah Al-Mukarramah and Resolution No. (9) 9/1  of the International Islamic Fiqh Academy which states: "Indeed, the contract which respects the origins ofIslamic dealings is the cooperative insurance contract which is based  on  donation  and  cooperation.."   Moreover, permissibility of cooperative insurance contract has never encountered dispute from any contemporary Fiqh scholar.6°
In addition  to what  has been  stated  above,  the  underlying  reasons for permissibility  of solidarity  reinsurance  and  impermissibility of commercial reinsurance  can be summarized  in the following essential differences between the two systems:
a) The commercial reinsurance company is an exchange-based financial contract which aims to make profit out of the reinsurance itself, and therefore should become subject to the rulings on exchange-based financial contracts which can be affected by Gharar. In the contrary, in  solidarity  reinsurance  the  contract  is based  on  donation  and cooperation and thus cannot be affected by Gharar when the contract involves it.
b) The company  in the Islamic reinsurance  contract  is an agent of the reinsurance  account, whereas in commercial  reinsurance  the company  is a principal  party who signs the contract  in his own name.
c) The  company  in  commercial  reinsurance  owns  the  reinsurance premiums against commitment to pay the reinsurance amount, while in Islamic reinsurance the company does not own the contributions, which are owned by the reinsurance account
d) In Islamic reinsurance the remaining part ofthe contributions and the returns on it -after expenses and compensations- go to the account of the policyholders (such amounts represent the surplus distributed among participants), whereas this cannot be imagined in commercial

(5) A Fatwa issued by the Shari'ah Board ofthe Al Rajhi Banking Company for Investment,
Fatwa No. (40).



1027





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance

reinsurance, because the contributions are owned by the company by virtue ofthe contract and through actual possession. The contributions in the case of commercial reinsurance are even considered as revenue and profit.
e) In Islamic reinsurance  the returns  earned  from investment  of the principal  amount  of the  contributions   go to  the  account  of the policyholder after deduction of the Mudaribs share by the company, whereas in commercial reinsurance such returns go to the company.
f) Islamic reinsurance aims to achieve cooperation among the participa• ting companies rather than profit, whereas commercial reinsurance aims to achieve profit from the reinsurance process itself.
g) In Islamic reinsurance  the company makes profits by investment of its funds in addition to its share in the Mudarabah, as it assumes the role of the Mudarib and the reinsurance account assumes the role of Rab al-Mal.
h) In Islamic reinsurance companies the participant and the reinsurance client are in fact the same person even iflegally considered as separate personalities, while in commercial reinsurance  companies they are completely different.
i) An Islamic reinsurance  company  observes the rules of the Islamic Shari'ah and the Fatwas issued by its Shari'ah Supervisory Board, whereas the case is not so for commercial reinsurance companies.
j) When the allocations deducted from the solidarity reinsurance fund remain unpaid until the time of liquidation they are spent on chari• table purposes and are not given to the participants, whereas in com• mercial reinsurance companies such funds go to participants.
■  The Islamic reinsurance  contract  is considered  as a binding  donation contract, because it is analogous to Munahadah (contribution of travelers to a pool of food victuals) or to pledge of donation. Both of the Islamic Fiqh Academy of the Muslim World League and the International Islamic Fiqh Academy stipulated in their resolutions referred to earlier that Islamic reinsurance is based on donation.



1028





Shari'ah Standard No. (41): Islamic Reinsurance

The fact that the Islamic reinsurance  contract  is binding  can also be derived from what has been emphasized by Imam Malik about donation. According to Imam Malik a gift in general becomes valid before possession, and this was also said to have been the viewpoint of Ali and Ibn Masood. The Hanbali scholars hold that a gift is binding even if it is not possessed, except in things that are measured in terms ofvolume and weight." Ibn Rushd (the grandson) said: "Scholars were in disagreement regarding possession...Malik said: "The contract is valid on acceptance, and possession ofthe gift should be enforced quite like the case in sale.."
Ali and Ibn Mas'ud are reported  to have said:  "Gift is permissible  if it is known, whether it is possessed  or not".  It is also reported  that Abu Bakar and  Omar  considered  the  gift to be binding  only when  it is possessed."" Therefore, Malik seems to have taken all these viewpoints into consideration. He derived from the viewpoint of Ali, Ibn Masood and the others that the contract as such is binding, whereas he took the viewpoint ofAbu Bakar and Omar to mean that possession is a necessary condition for completion of the contract so as to leave no room for the Dhar~'ah (excuse) mentioned by Umar.

The fact that a pledge ofdonation is binding can also be derived from the Hadith of the Prophet (peace be upon him) who said:  "The person who retreatsfrom a gift that he offers is like the dog which licks up its vomit".0
• The ruling that the company, which assumes the role ofthe agent in Islamic reinsurance, should not guarantee is based on the unanimous agreement among Fiqh scholars that an agent should not guarantee except in case of transgression, negligence or breach ofthe contract.
■  The necessity of mentioning the nine principles of Islamic reinsurance in the articles of association of the company stems from the need for reinfor• cing the donative nature of the contract and laying the Shari'ah foundation

(6) "Bidayat AL-Mujtahid" [2: 53]); "AL-Maughni" by Ibn Qudamah [5: 64]). See also:  "Bada'i' Al-Sana'i" [8: 3960]; and "Al-Ghayah AI-Quswa" [2: 655].
(7) "Bidayat AL-Mujtahid" [2: 534].
(8) See:  "AL-Muwatta" [2: 46]; and  "Nasb AL-Rayah" [4: 12]. (9) "Bidayat Al-Mujtahid" [2/53]).
(10)  "Sahih AL-Bukhart"  [5: 19]; and  "Sahih Muslim" (H:  1622).



1029





Shari'ah Standard No.  (41): Islami c Reinsurance

for this important  aspect of the company.  In the absence of emphasis on these principles which distinguish Islamic reinsurance from commercial reinsurance,  Islamic reinsurance may become an exchange-based reinsu• rance contract, and hence becomes vulnerable to nullification by Gharar, as has been indicated earlier. For illustration ofthese distinguishing principles of Islamic reinsurance, several Fatwas have been issued including:  Fatwa No.  (12/11)  issued by the 12 AI Baraka Seminar on Islamic Economics, and Fatwa No. (42/3) issued by the Shari'ah Supervisory Board of Al Rajhi Company, as well as the Fatwas of the Sharf'ah Supervisory Board of Faisal Islamic Bank, Islamic Insurance company -Jordan-"and Islamic Insurance Company of Qatar.
■    The basic elements and conditions  of the Islamic reinsurance  contract are derived from its nature as a contract which is binding to the two par• ties in addition to the special nature ofthe insurance contract with regard to the subject matter of insurance.
■  The reinsurer  and the client should honor  their commitments  because the reinsurance contract is binding to both parties. According to Sharf'ah, the two parties should honor  what they agree upon as long as it does not contradict with the rules and principles of Islamic Shari'ah. This can be derived from the Quranic Verses and Hadiths which instruct people to  observe  commitments   and  conditions  they  agree upon,  including the Verse: {"O you who believe! Fulfill (your) obligations}? and the Hadith of the Prophet  (peace be upon him) who said:  "Muslims  are at
their conditions".(3
■  The basis of the ruling that the reinsurance  company may assume the responsibility ofmanaging the reinsurance account against a fee or free of charge is the nature ofthe agency (Wakalah) contract which Fiqh scholars unanimously  declare as permissible with or without remuneration. This point  of view is supported  by the  12  AI Baraka Seminar on Islamic

(11) See:  "Fatawa Al-Ta  'min",  Dallah Al Baraka Group, reviewed by Dr. Abd Al-Sattar
Abu Guddah and Dr. Ezz Al-Din Mohammad Khojah, (pp. 99-108). (12) [A1-Ma' dah (The table):1].
(13) Related by Al-Bukhari  with dogmatizing  comments  from his side:  "Fath  Al-Bari" [4: 251]; "Al-Tirmidhi" - with "Tuhfat Al-Ahwazi" [4: 584] and he said a good and authentic Hadith.



1030





Shari'ah Standard No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance

Economics (Fatwa No.  12/11), the Islamic Fiqh Academy of the Muslim World League (Fatwa No. 961) and the Supreme Council ofUlama ofthe Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (Fatwa No. 51).
• Permissibility for the company to invest the funds of the reinsurance ac• count is based on the Mudarabah contract which Fiqh scholars unani• mously declare as permissible. Such contract entails prior specification of profit sharing ratios so that the reinsurance account can get its share ofthe profit as indicated by a number ofFatwas including: Fatwa ofthe Shari'ah Supervisory Board of Faisal Islamic Bank, Fatwa No.  12/11 of the 12
Seminar of Al Baraka and Shari'ah Standard No. (13) on Mudarabah.
• Necessity of observing conditions in general, including commitment  of the company to present Qard Hasan (benevolent loan) to the reinsurance account, is based on the commitment to honor pledges that are binding to only one party of the contract. Honoring such pledges is emphasized by a number  of distinguished  Fiqh scholars, and is well supported  by Shari'ah Texts and Traditions. One of these texts is the Verse: {"O you who believe! Fulfill (your) obligations"}, which is taken to mean any Shari'ah-acceptable commitment.  Several Hadiths  have also indicated enforceability of honoring  contracts, pledges and promises.    In this respect also Fiqh Academies and Shari'ah Supervisory Boards have issued resolutions including: Resolution No. (40-41) 2-3/50ofthe International Islamic Fiqh Academy, and the Fatwa of the Shari'ah Supervisory Board of the Islamic Insurance Company -Jordan.
■  The ruling that the participant should bear the burden ofproving, is based
on application ofthe general rules of evidence which state that evidence is to be provided by the alleger. This rule is supported by explicit indications from the Qur'an and the Sunnah and the viewpoints ofknowledgeable Fiqh scholars. A Fatwa in this regard has also been issued by the consolidated Shari'ah Supervisory Board ofAl Baraka (Fatwa No. 14/6).

(14) See: The Book titled "Al-Maudarabah Fi Kutub Al-Madhahib Al-Fiqhiyyah'; and "AL• Mawsuah Al-Kuwaytiyyah", the term Mudarabah.
(15) For more details see:  "Mabda' Al-Rida Fi AL-'Uqud", a comparative  study [2:  1161]
and its reliable references.
(16) See the Journal ofthe Academy, No. (5) 2/754-965. (17) "Fatawa Al-Ta 'min, (P. 106).



1031





Shari'ah Standard No.  (41): Islami c Reinsurance

■  The basis of permissibility of the two types of reinsurance is the various evidences  of permissibility of insurance  and  the  Fatwas  issued  by the
2 Seminar  of Al Baraka (Fatwa No.  2/9), the  10 Seminar  of Al Baraka (Fatwa No.  10/3/5), and the Fatwas of the Sharf'ah Supervisory  Boards of Dubai  Islamic Bank, Faisal Islamic Bank, Kuwait Finance  House, Qatar Islamic Bank and the Islamic Insurance  Company.
■  The basis of the rulings relating to the Islamic insurance  and reinsurance contract is the general principles  of contracts in the Islamic Shari'ah such as forbiddance  of cheating  and  fraud,  and  necessity of commitment to the time  specified for implementation of contracts. In addition  to these general  principles,  the  insurance   and  reinsurance   contracts   are  also based on specific  rulings pertaining  to insurance  coverage indicated  by the  Resolutions  and  Fatwas issued by the  Islamic Fiqh Academy of the Muslim World League, the Supreme Council  of Ulema and the Sharf'ah Supervisory  Boards of Islamic banks and Islamic insurance companies.(9
■  The jurisdictions of the company  are based on its articles of association, the  documents which  regulate  the  contract, the  general  principles  of contracts and conditions,  insurance  practices  and the Fatwas issued by Sharf'ah Supervisory Boards.
■  The  rulings  that  relate  to  regulation   of the  relationship  between  the
company and the policyholders are based on the articles of association of the company which specify whether the contract is a fee-based agency or not, in addition to the Mudarabah contract regarding the reinsurance fund
■  The  reinsurance   coverage  is based  on  the  general  texts  affirming  the Hadith which states:  "No harm and no reciprocal harm"" and the general rules and principles  of Islamic Fiqh which stipulate that coverage should be for the actual harms  and not at all for making  a wealth out of it. The reinsurance  coverage is also governed by the donative nature ofthe Islamic reinsurance  contract  and the Fatwas issued by competent  bodies such as

(18) "Fatawa Al-Ta 'min", (pp. 193 -206). (19) 1bid.
(20) Ibid.
(21) This is a Hadith  narrated by Malik in  "AL-Muwatta, Kitab Al-Aqdiyah,  (P. 464);
"Musnad Ahmad"  [1: 313 and 5: 527]; and Ibn Majah in his "Hashiyah [2: 784].



1032





Shari'ah Standard No. (41): Islamic Reinsurance

Fatwa No. (3) ofthe 10 Seminar ofAl Baraka and the Fatwas issued by the
Shari'ah Supervisory Boards ofIslamic banks and insurance companies.(
■  The reinsurance  surplus is based on the nature  of the donation-based contract and what has been reported by Al-Bukhari about the practice of the Sahabah (companions ofthe Prophet, peace be upon him) in the case of Munahadah.03
■  Permissibility of reinsurance  with traditional  reinsurance  companies is based on the practical necessity arising from lack for Islamic reinsurance coverage and the dire public need which ranks up as necessity. Shari'ah recognition for necessity and dire public need is supported by a number of Texts in the Qur'an and the Sunnah. In this respect also a Fatwa has been issued by Faisal Islamic Bank of Sudan (Fatwa No. 5/3).
























(22) "Fatawa AI-Ta 'min", (P. 153).
(23) Al-Bukhari stated in his "Sahih" with "Fath Al-Bari" [5:  12]), Bab Al-Sharikah Fi AL• Tatim Wa Al-Nihd Wa Al-'Urud ...because Muslims did not see any harm in Nihd, of which each ofthem used to eat a part, and he mentioned some Hadiths indicating what he had stated. In his Book "Fath AL-Bari" [5:  129], Ibn Hajar said: "Nihd is a practice in which all the people in companionship (on travel) provide the food Each of them contributes the same quantity, yet some may consume more than others, even though, the remaining food is shared among them if they do not decide to keep it for another journey': This is exactly the reinsurance surplus, or quite similar to it.



1033





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Reinsurance

The reinsurance contract is a contract according to which the insurance company transfers part of the risks of its insurance commitments to the reinsurance  company. The insurance company, therefore, undertakes  to pay to the reinsurance company part of the insurance premium paid by the participants, against commitment of the reinsurance company to bear part of the claims as per an agreement between the two parties. Islamic reinsurance has the distinctive characteristic of being based on the same principles of solidarity insurance, as indicated in Shari'ah Standard No. (26) on Islamic Insurance.

Special Need

Something that concerns a certain group of people, or the employees of a certain  profession, as for instance the  need for insurance  for the employees in trade and industry sectors.

Public Need
Something that does not concern a certain group ofpeople, or a certain country. Public need is the need that concerns everybody such as the need for Istisna'a.

Reinsurance Commission

A percentage amount of the contributions payable to the reinsurance company, paid to the Islamic insurance company for the efforts it exerts in mobilizing the reinsured insurance contracts.

Reinsurance Profit Commission

A percentage amount ofthe realized increase ofrevenues over expenses in the reinsurance agreement,  paid to the Islamic insurance company as



1034





Shari'ah Standard No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance

a bonus for its excellent performance in managing the insurance operations in general, and the reinsured risks in particular.

Risk-Sharing Reinsurance
The process of sharing the insured risk between the Islamic insurance company and other insurance companies, either due to lack of sufficient insurance capacity for such risk, or because of regulatory requirements  of risk sharing with regard to the magnitude of the risk in question.

Financial  Gains of Islamic Insurance  Companies  from Traditional
Reinsurance Companies

Reinsurance  agreements  between  traditional  reinsurance  companies and Islamic insurance  companies lead to the following financial gains to Islamic insurance companies:
■  Compensations for harms; the reinsurance company bears a percen• tage ofthe risk cover -when the harm materializes- commensurate to the percentage of its share from insurance contributions.
■  Reinsurance commission; which is a percentage amount ofthe contribu• tions payable to the reinsurance company, paid to the Islamic insurance company for the efforts it exerts in mobilizing the reinsured insurance contracts.
■  Reinsuranceprofitcommission;whichreferstoapercentageamountofthe
realizedincreaseofrevenues (reinsurancecontributions) overexpensesinthe reinsurance agreement (coverage), paidto the Islamic insurance company as a bonus for its excellent performance in managing the insurance ope• rations in general and the reinsured risks in particular, and providing the best services to its customers. Such amount is paid in the form of an agreed upon percentage of the profits of the reinsurance company, as per the reinsurance agreement signed between the two companies. When  the reinsurance  company  earns profits  from the reinsurance contracts signed between the two companies, the reinsurance company pays the part of the profits agreed upon to the insurance company.







1035





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance





Appendix (D)
A Model Reinsurance Agreement Issued by Islamic Insurance Company - Jordan


1. The insurance  company agrees with the reinsurance  company on signing annual  agreements with the aim of transferring part  of the risk borne by the insurance  company, to the reinsurance company.

2. The insurance  company assumes beforehand commitment to transfer to the reinsurer the agreed upon part ofthe reinsured risk, and the reinsurer offers  his  acceptance. According  to the  conditions  of the  reinsurance agreements, the  commitment of the reinsurer  becomes  valid  since the time of signing the original insurance  contract with the insurance  client

3. The insurance company assumes the commitment to pay the reinsurance contribution  against the commitment of the reinsurer  to pay its share of the claims, in addition to the commissions agreed upon  for the contracts within  the signed agreements.  It can also be stipulated in the agreement that the insurance company shall obtain a share in the profits achieved by the reinsurer under the signed agreements.

4. The insurance company retains a percentage of the reinsurance contribu• tions (40%) for fire agreements, general accidents and marine and health insurance, as a guarantee for honoring  commitments  from the side of the reinsurer. The amount thus retained is to be released after one year within the reinsurance agreement. During the period of its retention, the amount is to be invested with the Islamic Bank of Jordan through  Sharf'ah-accept• able modes of investment, and the reinsurer be given the part ofthe return agreed upon.

5. The return  thus obtained by the reinsurer  becomes part of his accounts, and is deductable from the commissions to be received from him, on the



1036





Shari'ah Standard No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance

basis of the fact that such amount  is part  of the cost of the reinsurance operation.

6. The reinsurer assumes the commitment to pay commission to the insurance company.  Such commission  is determined as a certain percentage of the reinsurance contributions. This amount does not represent a commission in the strict sense of the word. It is rather a contribution  from the part of the reinsurer in the direct expenses borne by the insurance company, and which relate to the reinsured risks.

7. Such commissions enter  into  the  accounts  of policyholders as part  of revenues in the account  of the cooperative insurance fund.

8. The reinsurance  agreement normally stipulates the right of the insurance company to obtain a specific percentage of the net profits achieved by the reinsurer under the reinsurance  agreement

9. Reinsurance  profit commission  is calculated at the end of the agreement period, and enters into the accounts of the policyholders as part of reve• nues.





























1037























