Shari'ah Standard No. (42)



Financial Rights and How They
Are Exercised and Transferred












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                           1043
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................      1044

1. Scope of the Standard..............................................................................      1044
2. Definition of Financial Rights.................................................................      1044
3. Types of Financial Rights                                                                       1044
4. Rights Resulting from Ownership..........................................................      1046
5. Easements..................................................................................................      1046
6. Financial Rights Arising from Neighbourhood                                    1046
7. Right of Shuf'ah (Preemption)................................................................      1047
8. Right of Occupancy..................................................................................      1048
9. Right ofTahjir.........................................................................................        1049
10. Transfer of Rights for Consideration......................................................      1049
11. How Rights Are Exercised and Transferred                                             1050
12. Protection ofRights..................................................................................      1050
13. Some Rules Governing Contemporary Applications of the Transfer
and Exercise of Financial Rights.............................................................      1051
14. Date of Issuance ofthe Standard.............................................................      1051
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1052
Appendices
Appendix (a):  BriefHistory ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1053
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard....................................       1054
Appendix (c):  Definitions.............................................................................       1058










1041








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to describe the rules relating to financial rights, how they are exercised and transferred  and the mechanisms used to protect them as well as to highlight certain rights exercised in the transactions of Islamic financial institutions.co
































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



1043





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard provides a description of financial rights, their types, rules, conditions, parameters, the way they are exercised and transferred and the mechanisms used to protect them. It also addresses the most important rights exercised in the transactions of financial institutions.

This Standard does not cover non-financial rights; Khiyarat (options to terminate  a contract); e.g., Khiyar al-Shart (an option stipulated by the parties giving one or both ofthem the right to revoke the contract within a specified period  of time) and Khiyar al-Naqd (an option giving the seller the right to revoke the contract for non-payment within a specified time etc.); or rights relating to Waqf (endowments), as they have already been covered in separate standards.

2. Definition of Financial Rights

A financial right is the prerogative of a (natural or artificial) person recognized by the Sharf'ah to have rights and responsibilities and the legal capacity to enter into transactions.

3. Types of Financial Rights

Financial rights are ofthree types:

3/1 Personal rights (rights in personam): These are rights arising from the liability of another person, such as debts payable by a debtor.

3/2 Proprietary rights (rights in rem): These are rights attached to specific property  conferring  to the owner direct authority over it without interference from another person, whether such rights are primary or secondary.

3/2/1 Primary proprietary rights, such as rights arising from full and complete ownership,  are independent  rights that do not rely on the existence of any other right.



1044





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

3/2/2 Secondary proprietary rights; these are proprietary rights that have no purpose  of their own except to protect  the fulfillment of personal  rights, such as the rights  of a creditor  in security provided  by an obligor.

3/2/3 The distinction between proprietary and personal  rights: The owner of a proprietary right is able to directly enforce his right to  specific property using  permissible means.  The  owner  of a personal  right, on the other hand, cannot enforce his right by claiming any specific property.

3/3  Rights to intangible  assets:

3/3/1 These  are financial  rights  to  intangible  assets, whereby  the owner  is exclusively entitled  to their  output.

3/3/2 Types of rights to intangible assets: Rights to intangible assets are ofmany kinds, including rights to trade name, trading addresses, trademarks, commercial licenses; intellectual property, technical and industrial know-how, patents and copyrights.

3/3/3  Rules governing  rights to intangible  assets:

3/3/3/1 Rights to trade names, trading  addresses, trademarks, copyrights, inventions and patents are the rights of their respective owners. These possess recognised monetary value in contemporary business and commercial custom. Since these rights are recognised and protected by the Sharf'ah, it is not permissible to violate them.

3/3/3/2 Since rights  to intangible  assets are recognised  as fi• nancial rights, it is permissible to dispose of or transfer them for consideration  provided that such transactions are free of Gharar (ambiguity), deception and fraud.

3/3/3/3 Commercial license: A commercial license is a right given by the relevant authority to certain businesses to engage in specified  activities. It is permissible for the license holder to dispose of it for or without  consider• ation unless specifically prohibited by law.



1045





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

3/4 Financial rights can be acquired by contract, stipulated conditions, inheritance  or court order. Financial rights may be established by long-standing continuous use without objection or first use subject to fulfillment of all the Shari'ah conditions required for the acquisition of such rights.

4. Rights Resulting from Ownership

4/1 Ownership ofan asset or usufruct gives the owner the right ofcomplete disposition, either by a complete transfer or the transfer of usufruct only, for or without consideration, except what is prohibited by the Sharf'ah.

4/2 Ownership of usufruct entitles the owner to use it (whether directly or indirectly through  another  person)  subject to compliance with the terms stipulated by the owner of the asset and bearing liability for the asset in case ofmisuse, negligence or breach of condition.

4/3 Ownership of a license to use gives the licensee the right to personal use only which cannot be transferred to a third party.

5. Easements

5/1 Private easements are established rights attached to one real estate property over another, such as irrigation rights, watercourse rights, drainage rights and rights of passage.

5/2  Public easements are the rights of the general public to benefit from public utilities provided by the state and similar entities.

5/2/1 The right of an individual to a public easement is restricted to personal use only.

6. Financial Rights Arising from Neighbourhood

6/1 The rights of neighbourhood based on the ownership  of different floors of a building prohibit each owner to act in a manner that will definitely or most likely cause harm to others.

6/2 Since the owners of different  floors of a building  co-ownership in the underlying land, the following apply:



1046





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

6/2/1  If a lower storey collapses due to any fault of its owner, he is liable to reconstruct it so that the owners of the upper-storeys are not harmed.

6/2/2 If the owner of the lower storey is not  responsible for the collapse, the courts have decisive authority to settle the matter in the best interests of both parties and to avert harm from them.

6/2/3 The owners have the right to enjoy use of common facilities and services.

7. Right of Shufah  (Preemption)

7/1  Definition  of Shuf'a  (preemption):  Shuf'a  is the  right  given to a neighbour  or co-owner of real estate property to acquire a sold property from its buyer with or without their consent for the price at which it was sold.

7/1/1 The right ofShuf'ah exists only in relation to immovable prop•
erty or movable property attached to it.

7/1/2 The right ofShuf'ah enjoyed by a neighbour is applicable only when the two properties share common easement rights.

7/2 Rules of Shufa'h

7/2/1 The Shafi' (preemptor) takes the place ofthe buyer and, subject to circumstances being equal,  enjoys  the right to purchase the property on the same terms as contracted with the buyer, such as deferred payment. The Shafi' (preemptor) assumes all also the liabilities ofthe buyer such as the usual conveyancing costs.

7/2/2 If in a jointly owned property, there are more than one Shu•
fa'a' (preemptors), each has the right of Shuf'ah proportionate to his share in the property.

7/2/3 Rights of Shuf'a are not extinguished upon the death of the
Shafi' (preemptor) but are inherited by his heirs.



1047





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

7/2/4 Rights of Shufah must be claimed immediately upon becoming aware of the sale in accordance with custom or law, failing which they lapse.

7/2/5 The Shafi' (preemptor) is entitled to invalidate all the dispositions of the preempted property  that were made prior to the exercise of the right of Shuf'ah, even ifit has changed hands.

7/2/6  There is no right ofShuf'ah where ownership is transferred without a sale or a transaction having the effect of a sale. Therefore, there is no right of Shuf'ah where transfer is effected by inheritance, bequest or gift without consideration.
8. Right of Occupancy

Occupancy is a right based on the right ofthe tenant to retain his tenancy in property or commercial  unit.

Occupancy  has a number  of forms:

8/1  The  Shari'ah  does not prohibit  the owner  and the tenant  agreeing that  the tenant  will pay a lump  sum  of money  over and above the periodic rental amount,  on condition  that it is considered part of the agreed rent for the entire lease period. If the lease is terminated early, the rules applicable to rental payments  apply to this amount.

8/2  It is permitted by the Shari'ah for the owner and the tenant to agree during  the lease period  that  the  owner will pay an amount to the tenant  in  exchange  of the  tenant  waiving his  contractual   right  to the ownership  of the usufruct  for the remaining  period  on the basis that  such payment  compensates  the  tenant  for waiver of his right to the usufruct that  he purchased  from the owner.  However,  if the lease period expires and the contract is not renewed, either expressly or by operation  of a provision  for automatic  renewal, then  it is not permitted to take payment for vacating the premises, and the owner has the right to take back his property after expiry of the term.

8/3  The Shari'ah permits an agreement between the incumbent tenant and a new tenant during the lease period to assign the lease for an amount exceeding the regular rental amount  for release of occupancy subject to the requirements  of the terms and conditions of the original lease



1048





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

contract and applicable laws that are compliant with the rules of the
Shari'ah.

In  long-term  lease  contracts,  contrary  to  contractual   terms that are based  on what is permitted by the laws of some jurisdictions, the Sharf'ah does not permit  the tenant  to sub-lease  or assign the property  to another  tenant  in return  for payment  except with  the agreement of the owner.
If the incumbent tenant  agrees to hand  over occupancy  to a new tenant after the end of the lease period, the Shari'ah does not permit him to take any payment  because the right of the incumbent tenant in the usufruct has expired.

9. Right ofTahjir

9/1  Tahjir means taking possession of a piece ofland  and marking it with certain recognised markers with the permission  of the government.

9/2 Tahjir results in exclusivity and priority over others, but it does not on its own confer ownership.

9/3 A person who has carried out Tahjir on a piece ofland is permitted to waive his entitlement  in favour of another person for consideration, but he is not allowed to sell the land as he does not yet own it.
9/4 The right of Tahjir expires if the land is not utilised for three years, or as provided by applicable regulations.

10. Transfer of Rights for Consideration

10/ 1   It is not permissible to take consideration for transfer ofput or call option rights, whether by means of sale or otherwise.

10/2 It is not permissible to take consideration  for transfer or waiver of rights granted  only to prevent harm,  such as the right of Shuf'ah (preemption).

10/3 It is permissible  to take consideration for transfer  or waiver of easement  rights, by means of sale or otherwise.

10/4  It is permissible  to sell rights to use and rights arising from first use.



1049





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

11. How Rights Are Exercised and Transferred

11/1  AII financial rights are in principle disposable, and the owner of a financial right has the absolute right to exercise and transfer his right in accordance with the rules and principles of the Sharf'ah and in particular, the following:

11/1/1 Rights should not be exercised in a manner abuse to others.

11/ 1/2 The public interest is given priority when it conflicts with the exercise of a private property right.

11/2 Subject to the provisions ofthis Standard, the constructive methods of disposal of rights include all types of contracts  of exchange, donations, waivers, partnerships, and assignments of rights.  [see Standard No. (7) on Hawalah]

12. Protection  of Rights

12/1 Rights are to be protected from any violation.

12/2  In addition  to the provisions  of Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (5) on
Guarantees, the methods ofprotecting financial rights include:

a) Rights do not extinguished by passage of time but there can be a limitation period after which a claim cannot be made in court.

b) Right of lien:  A creditor has the right to retain the debtor's property  already in his possession until he receives payment of the due debt from the debtor. This may take several forms:
I. The right of the seller to retain the sold item until he receives the due price.
II.The right of a manufacturer or worker to retain the product of their work until they receive the payment due.
III. The right of the lessor to retain the lessee's property inside the leased asset until he receives the rent due, because the lessor has possession of the leased asset which contains the lessee's property.
IV. The right of a courier to retain the dispatched property until he receives his fees.



1050





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

V.  The  right  of a bailee to  retain  the bailed  property until  he receives his fee.
VI. The right of an agent to retain the property of the principal until he receives his agency fee.

c) If the  buyer  of an item  becomes  insolvent  and  the  seller finds that specific item in the insolvency assets, the seller has a priority proprietary right to it ifthe applicable regulations ofa jurisdiction allow it. Refer to Shari'ah Standard No. (43) on Insolvency.

13. Some Rules Governing  Contemporary  Applications  of the Transfer and Exercise of Financial Rights

13/1  It is permitted for corporate  bylaws to give existing shareholders priority over third  parties to subscribe  for shares upon  a decision to increase the company's share capital. Each shareholder is entitled to subscribe in proportion to his respective share prior to the share issuance.

13/2  It is permissible to assign a right ofpriority referred to in item 13/ 1 to a third party without  consideration, subject to the provisions  of the law and the rules of company supervisory bodies.

14. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 4 Dhul-Qa'dah 1430 A.H., corresponding to 23 October  2009 A.D.




















1051





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board has adopted the Standard on Financial Rights and How they are Exercised and Transferred in its meeting No. (25) held during the period of 2-4 Dhul-Qadah 1430 A.H., corresponding to 21-23 October
2009A.D.











































1052





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On  13 Shawwal  1425  A.H., corresponding to 25 November  2004 A.D., the  General  Secretariat  decided  to  commission   a Shari'ah consultant to prepare  a juristic  study  on Financial  Rights and  How They Are Exercised and Transferred.

In its meeting held on 4 Sha'ban 1426 A.H., corresponding to 8 September
2005 A.D., the Sharf'ah Standards Committee  discussed the draft of a Sharf'ah Standard on on Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred and made necessary amendments.

The revised draft of the Shari'ah  Standard was presented  to the Sharf'ah Board in its meeting No. (16) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, during the period of 7-12 Jumada I, 1427 A.H., corresponding to 3-9 June 2006 A.D. It became clear that the issue needed further  study to deal with some Shari'ah aspects.

The General  Secretariat commissioned a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Financial  Rights and Their Disposition (to be presented) on 14 Jumada II, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 7 June 2009 A.D.

The  General  Secretariat  held  a public  hearing,  and  all the  comments made in the public hearing were listened to, and the members ofthe Shari'ah Board answered these comments and made commentary on them.

In its meeting  No. (25) held in Bahrain  during  the period  of 2-4 Dhul• Qadah 1430 A.H., corresponding to 21-23 October  2009 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board  discussed  the  draft  of the  Standard,  incorporated the  necessary amendments that it deemed  appropriate, and adopted the Standard.



1053





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


The basis for the recognition of financial  rights  is recognised  jurispru• dential evidences from the Qur 'an, Sunnah, Ijma' and Qiyas that indicate the right of ownership.
■  The basis for the rules governing rights to intangible assets is the Resolution of the  International  Islamic Fiqh Academy No. (43)  5/5 affirming, from established proofs, their existence and the rules governing them, which are the basis for the resolution.
■  The  basis for the  distinction  between  proprietary rights and  personal rights is the view of contemporary jurists that Islamic jurisprudence has recognised this distinction in all matters that require such distinction.0
■  The basis for the recognition  of rights, whether  to tangible or intangible assets is the saying of the Prophet  (peace be upon him): "No harm and no reciprocal harm"•3
■  The basis for the right of Shuf'a enjoyed by a partner  or a neighbour  is the practice of the Prophet  (peace be upon him). Jabir Ibn Abdullah  (may Al• lah be pleased with him) narrated:  "Allah's Messenger  (peace be upon him) ruled in favor ofthe right ofShufah so long as the property is not divided". Abu Salamah Ibn Abdul-Rahman  narrated:  "The Prophet (peace be upon him) ruled in favor of the right ofShufah in property that has not been di•
vided among the partners. If boundaries have been assigned between them and the paths have been demarcated,  then there is no right ofShufah.° In
the narration  related by Muslim:  "The Prophet (peace be upon him) ruled in favor of the right ofShufah in any undivided co-ownership, whether in a

(2) See Mustafa Al-Zarqa:  "Al-Madkhal Ila Nazariyyat AL-Iltizam".
(3) The Hadith has  been related  by Malik  in  "Al-Muwatta "' (P. 464); "Musnad Ahmad"
[1:313], and  "Sunan Ibn Majah" [2: 784]. (4) "Sahih AL-Bukhari", (H: 2257).
(5) "AI-Muwatta", (H:  1420).



1054





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

piece ofland or an orchard. A co-owner is not allowed to sell his share unless permitted by the other co-owners. Ifthe co-owner wants, he can buy it. Ifhe wants, he can leave it. But ifone co-owner sells it without permission ofthe
other co-owners,  then they have a greater right to it.9 Qatadah narrated that the Prophet (peace be upon him) said:  "The neighbour of the house has a greater right to the house".(7)  These two Hadiths are reconciled by ascribing the last Hadith to a neighbour who is also a co-owner or shares easement rights.
■  The basis for the right to a share of water is Allah's Statement in the Qur'an:  {"Here is a she-camel: It has a right to drink (water), and you have a right to drink (water),  (each) on a day, known}." There is also Allah's Statement in the Qur'an: ''And inform them that the water is to
be shared between them. Each one should drink in turn. In Shari'ah, it
means a turn to utilise water for land or trees or crops. Related Shari'ah terms are the right of Shirb, which is specifically for watering crops and trees; the right of Shafah, which is specifically the right of humans and animals to drink as well as using water for purposes like ablution, bathing, etc.GThere is a special set of rules for water in the Shari'ah based upon the statement of the Prophet (peace be upon him): "People share in three things: water, pasturage andfire"•
■  The basis for the right of Tahjir and the rights established by first use is the Sunnah.  Ibn Qudamah  states:  ''Anyone who carries out Tahjir of previously unappropriated land and begins to make it productive but did not complete it, he is more entitled to it than others, based upon the sta• tement of the Prophet (peace be upon him):  'Jtnyone who first uses what no other Muslim haspreviously used is more entitled to it". Ifhe transfers it to someone else, then the second person is more entitled to it than others because the first owner of the right has granted it to him. If the owner of the right dies, it transfers to his heirs, based on the statement of the

(6) "Sahih Muslim" (H: 1608).
(7) "Sahih al-Bukhari" with "Fath AI-Bart" [12: 345]. (8) [AI-Shu'ara  (The Poets):  155).
(9) [Al-Qamar (The Moon): 28].
(10) AI-Kasani, "Bada 'i' AI-Sana'r" [6: 188-192]. (11)  "Musnad Ahmad"  [5: 364].



1055





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

Prophet  (peace be upon him):  "The heirs ofa deceased person inherit his estate". However, it is not permitted for the owner of a right  of Tahjir to sell it because his entitlement is confined to his personal  use like the right
of Shuf'ah (preemption).  [An alternative  view is that] its sale could be considered  valid because he is more  entitled  to it.2 Al-Mardawi  states: "Anyone carrying out Tahjir over previously unappropriated land will not own it...but he is more entitled to it than  others, as well as his heirs after him and whomever he transfers  it to, without  any dispute. However, he cannot  sell it, and this is the position  of our School. It has also been said that he may sell it. Abu Khattab mentioned it as a possibility, and he refer• red to its permissibility as the correct position  without  any qualification
in "Al-Muharrar",  "AI-Riayatayn" and "AI-Hawi Al-Saghir".3
■  The basis for the prohibition of abusive  exercise of rights  is deduction from the Qur'an and Sunnah. There are many Verses in the Qur 'an which indicate the obligation  of justice, fairness  and refraining  from exercising
one's rights in a way that harms others. Allah commands: {"Showforgive•
ness, enjoin what is good, and turn awayfrom thefoolish}     As for the
Sunnah, we find the following Hadith:  "May Allah bless the person who is lenient in selling and buying and when demanding his right".
■  The basis for the invalidity of a condition stipulating that the seller retains ownership  in a sale contract  is that  the transfer  of ownership  is a legal effect of the sale contract. Therefore, it is not permissible  for a sale to take place without  it. This has also been  stressed  in Resolution  No.  (51) 6/2 of the International Islamic Fiqh Academy held in Jeddah, which  states: "The seller is not entitled  to retain ownership  of the sold item after the sale, but it is permissible  for him to stipulate a condition  on the buyer to retain possession  of the item as security against deferred  installments.
■  The basis for the right of retention is the Qur 'an and Sunnah. As for the Qur 'an, it is stated by Allah:  "And ifyou punish, then punish them with the like ofthat with which you were afflected. But ifyou endure patient•

(12) 1bn Qudamah, "AL-Kaft" [2: 394].
(13) AI-Mardawi, "AI-Insaf" [6: 373 and 374]. (14) [AI-A'raf (The Heights):199].



1056





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

ly, verily, it is better for those who are patient.US The Glorious Verse indicates the permissibility of reciprocal treatment.  Based on this,  it is permissible for a person to retain his property unless he receives his own rights from others. As for the Sunnah, it was narrated that the Prophet (peace be upon him)  said:  "The best amongst you is the one who is best in settlement of his obligations".(9
■  The basis for the impermissibility  of taking consideration  for sale or transfer ofput or call options is Resolution No. (63) 7I I ofthe Internatio• nal Islamic Fiqh Academy, which is based on recognised evidences.
■  The basis for the impermissibility ofselling the abstract rights mentioned
in item IO is the lack of monetary value [according to Shari'ah] as well as the presence of Gharar (uncertainty)and Jahalah (ambiguity).

































(15)  [AI-Nahal (The Bees):  126].
(16)  "Sunan Al-Nasai", printed  with Suyuti's Commentary, (P 318).



1057





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Right of Easement

It is the established right over one piece of real estate for the benefit of another piece of real estate.

Right oflrrigation (Shirb)

Shirb literally means a share in water. The Shari'ah definition is a turn to irrigate land or trees or crops.

Right of Watercourse (Majra)

It is the right of an owner of land distant from a watercourse to bring it via the property of his neighbour to his land to irrigate it.

Right of Drainage  (Masil)

It is the right of a person to get rid of excess water in his property via the property of another person. Watercourse is different from drainage in that watercourse is in order to bring water whereas drainage is to get rid of water not needed for the land.

Right of Way Easement  (Murur)

It is the right of the owner of an interior piece of land (land surrounded by other persons' lands) to access his land by means ofa road/path. It makes no difference if the road/path is public, not owned by anyone, or is privately owned by someone.

Right of Ascendancy  (Ta'alli)

The right of ascendancy means one person's right to have his structure be physically located above the structure of another person. This happens in multi- storey buildings in which one person owns a unit in a lower storey and another owns a unit in the storey above it.



1058





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

Preemption

Preemption in the terminology of jurists means the entitlement of the partner to buy what his partner has sold for the price at which he sold it.

Intangible Rights

Intangible right is the authority of a person over something that is ab• stract, e.g., ideas and inventions. The International Islamic Fiqh Academy, headquartered in Jeddah, issued its Resolution No. (43) 5/5 on the subject ofintangible rights, which include; Trade Name, Title, Trademark, Author• ship, and Invention. The Academy considered these to be rights particular to their respective owners which have established financial value. Conse• quently, these rights are recognized by the Shari'ah and they should not be violated.

Right of Utilization (Intifa')

The right of utilization is a juridical concept that refers to a person's temporary right over the asset ofanother person, who authorizes him to use it, exploit it, and dispose of its usufruct, but not the asset itself, during the period of utilization. The majority ofjurists, including the Shaff'is, Malikis and Hanbalis, distinguish between the ownership of usufruct  (Manfa'ah) and ownership of utilization  (Intifa'). Granting ownership of utilization (Intifa')  only allows  a person  to  directly  utilise  [the  asset].  Granting ownership of usufruct (Manfa'ah) is more general and comprehensive; it allows its owner to use the asset himself or to enable others to use it, either for compensation, as in a lease, or without compensation, as in gratuitous lending ofthe asset.

Right of Exclusive Lease (Hikar)

Hikar is the right to lease the land of an endowment for a long period of time.  The Mustahkir  (exclusive lessee) makes an advance payment to the endowment  which is nearly equal to the price of the land that is used to develop it or for the maintenance  of its premises. Another, insignificant, amount is arranged to be paid annually to the endowment by the Mustahkir  (exclusive lessee) or by whosoever this right has been transferred to.



1059





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

Right of Priority in Subscribing to an Increase in a Company's  Capital

It is the stipulation that the existing shareholders will have the right of priority in subscribing to an increase in the company's capital by purchasing shares at their nominal value

Vacating Houses or Shops

It refers to the right to stay in a house or shop.

Business License

It is a right granted by the authorities to some traders to deal in specific activities.

Right of Demarcation

It means  taking possession  of a piece of land  and  marking  it with markers  or a wall. Demarcation confers  privilege  and precedence  over others. It means that whosoever dernarks land is more entitled to develop it; however, it does not confer ownership.

Disposal

Disposal is the competence approved by the Sharf'ah, or custom, or law that enables the owner ofrights to dispose ofthem. This disposal can either be by transferring his right to others for recompense; e.g., sale or barter, or without recompense; e.g., gift, will, or by relinquishment.

Abusive Use of a Right

It the use ofa right in such a way that it is likely to cause serious extraor•
dinary harm to another.

Expiry

It is the lapse ofa right due to the passage oftime. However, in the Shari'h, rights do not lapse due to the mere passage of time.












1060

























