Shari'ah Standard No.  (43)



Insolvency












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                           1065
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................      1066

1. Scope of the Standard..............................................................................      1066
2. Definitions of Insolvency and the Declaration of Insolvency.............      1066
3. Shari'ah Ruling on Insolvency................................................................      1066
4. Stages of Insolvency                                                                                1066
5. Consequences of Insolvency...................................................................      1068
6. Right of Claw-Back of an Item Sold to the Debtor Prior to the Dec•
laration of Insolvency (the Right of Claw-Back)..................................      1069
7. Sale ofthe Sequestered Assets and Allowances Made for the Insolvent
Debtor........................................................................................................      1070
8. Distribution  of the Insolvent Debtor's Assets Among the Creditors.      1070
9. Rules Specific to Institutions...................................................................      1071
10. Revoking the Declaration of Insolvency................................................      1072
11. Date of the Issuance of the Standard......................................................      1073
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1074
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1075
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard..............................            1077
Appendix (c):  Definitions.......................................................................            1081














1063








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to describe the rules ofinsolvency and the circumstances that  precede  it, whether  they  are faced by the  institutions,  companies  or individuals, both businessmen and non-businessmen,  with whom financial institutions" deal.































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



1065





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This  Standard  covers the  Shari'ah  rules  relating  to  the  causes and consequences  of insolvency, whether  faced by an institution  or its institutional or individual business and non-business customers. It also addresses the judicial declaration of insolvency over an institution  and its consequences, and in particular, the sale ofits assets, the distribution of the proceeds among the creditors and how insolvency is revoked.

It does not cover financial difficulties (as defined by Islamic jurisprudence), liquidity shortfalls or delays in payment that do not lead to a declaration of insolvency.

2. Definitions of Insolvency and the Declaration of Insolvency
Insolvency (Iflas): When the debt due of a person exceeds his assets. Declaration of insolvency (Taflees): A judge's declaration that a debtor is
insolvent, preventing him from disposing of his assets.

3. Shari'ah Ruling on Insolvency

3/1 A person whose debts exceed his assets has a moral obligation in Shari'ah to refrain from any action that may harm the creditors, even if he has not been declared insolvent.

3/2  The competent authorities should declare a person insolvent when his debts exceed his assets and sequester his assets ifhis creditors demand it, subject to the conditions mentioned in item 4/3.

3/3 When  a debtor  is declared  insolvent, the  declaration  must  be documented and certified as required by official procedures.

4. Stages of Insolvency

4/1  First stage: The creditors make a demand  upon the debtor to pay the debt due to the creditors pro-rata and to refrain from making



1066





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency

donations,  providing  loans  or  disposing  of or  acquiring  assets preferentially. The creditors can seek the assistance of concerned authorities in this regard.

4/2 Second stage: Ifthe debtor refuses to pay what he owes to the creditors, the creditors are entitled to file a claim against him as a step towards seeking a declaration of insolvency. They can petition the competent authorities to seek to:

4/2/1  Prevent the debtor from making donations;

4/2/2  Prevent the debtor from providing loans;

4/2/3  Prevent the  debtor from giving preferential treatment  (for example to certain creditors or in the disposal or acquisition of assets);

4/2/4  Prevent the debtor from admitting financial liability to those who may be the subject of preferential treatment such as his blood  relatives connected by up to four vertical steps (for example, a first cousin, who is connected vertically via the grandparents); and such as affiliates, subsidiaries and group entities of institutions;

4/2/5  Prevent the debtor from pre-paying debts that are not yet due;

4/2/6  Prevent the  debtor  from  transferring  any of his assets to some of the creditors or selling to or purchasing from them preferentially; and

4/2/7  Prevent the debtor from travel that causes harm to the creditors without appointing a surety to ensure his attendance ifrequired, providing guarantors.

4/3 A declaration of insolvency requires:

4/3/1  An application made by creditors demanding that a debtor whose  due  debts  exceed his  assets be  declared insolvent, subject to item 5/5; or

4/3/2  An application made by the debtor himself, except when the competent judicial authority considers his application to be fraudulent



1067





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency

4/4 The creditors are not required to prove that they are the sole creditors.
If another  creditor  appears before the distribution, he is entitled  to a pro-rata share  of the  distribution.  If a creditor  appears  after the distribution, the rule set out in item 8 shall apply subject to statutory procedures  so long as they are not inconsistent with the rules and principles  of Sharf'ah.

4/5 The court has the sole authority to declare a person  insolvent.

5. Consequences of Insolvency

Declaration of a debtor's insolvency  gives rise to the following  conse•
quences:

5/1  An admission  by a debtor, who has been declared insolvent, of any liability to another  person  relating to his sequestered  assets has no legal effect, whether such admission relates to a debt incurred before or after the declaration  of insolvency, unless the creditors accept that such debt was incurred  before the declaration  of insolvency.

5/2  The debts owed to creditors  are attached  to the existing property of the debtor at the time of sequestration as well as to any property that accrues  to him  without  his dealing, such as gifts. All his property remains  in his ownership  until  it is determined that  such property be sold and that the proceeds be distributed among the creditors.

5/3 The  debtor's  acts  of sale,  gift or  endowment  subsequent to  the declaration  of insolvency have no legal effect, with the exception  of acts relating to previous transactions, such as terminating a defective contract and  exercising  an option  to terminate.  Such lack of legal effect  applies  during  the  period of uncertainty that precedes the declaration  of insolvency, as assessed by the competent authority.

5/4 After  declaration  of insolvency, all the  debtor's subsequent  acts of sale, purchase,  admission   ( of liability)  or  guarantee,  are  attached to his future  liability and  not  to the sequestered  assets. He can be required  to discharge  such subsequent  liabilities after revocation  of the sequestration. Those whose rights attach to his liability are not entitled to share the sequestered assets with the creditors.



1068





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency

5/5/1 All ofthe debtor's undue debts become due despite the creditors of such  undue   debts  having  no  present   right  to  demand a declaration of his insolvency. The creditors of undue debts are entitled to share the sequestered assets with the creditors of due debts.
5/5/2 If the  lessee becomes  insolvent  during  the  Ijarah  term, the lessor shall be entitled,  on a pro-rata basis along with  other creditors, to the amount  of rent  corresponding to the period during  which  the  usufruct  was enjoyed.  For the  remaining period, the  lessor  shall have  the  option  either  to  terminate the Ijarah contract or to carry on with it so that he has claims on the insolvency assets for the rent of the remaining  period, while  enabling  the  lessee  to  enjoy  the  usufruct  unless  the court considers continuity  of the ljarah to be in the interest of creditors, in which case the lessor shall receive the rent amount in full.

5/6  It is permissible, with the approval ofthe creditors, to agree to reduce undue  debt  that  was accelerated  by the  declaration  of insolvency and guarantors  are liable to pay the reduced amount,  rather than the amount  originally guaranteed.

5/7 Undue debts owed to the insolvent debtor do not become due upon insolvency; all outstanding debts owed to the insolvent debtor before the declaration of insolvency (even ifnot yet due) are included in the insolvency assets  ( and are distributed  to the creditors  as and when they are paid).

5/8  After distribution, creditors have no legal right to demand any unpaid debt from the debtor. However, the debtor has a moral obligation in Shari'ah to pay all the debts in full.

6. Right ofClaw-Back ofan Item Sold to the Debtor Prior to the Declaration of Insolvency (the Right of Claw-Back)

The right of claw-back gives a creditor who sold an item to the insolvent debtor the right to demand  return  of the specific item if it is among the



1069





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency

sequestered  assets or to have claims on these assets.  This right  shall  be established for the seller who has not received any part of the selling price.

7. Sale of the Sequestered Assets and Allowances Made for the Insolvent
Debtor

7/1  The  concerned   authorities  will  order  the  sale  of the  sequestered assets -other  than  the  assets described  below- whether  they  are in currencies different to the currency in which the insolvency is being administered, fungibles, stocks, commodities (goods or merchandise) or real estate. A reasonable period  of time should be allowed before selling  real  estate  assets,  and  assets  should  be  sold  in  the  order provided  above. A survey of market  prices should be conducted  to ensure  that  a better  price  could  not  be achieved  at auction. If the price offered  is less than  the value of the asset,  the auction  should be repeated  to obtain the value of the asset. Otherwise,  it should be sold at whatever price is achieved on the third auction. If possible, it is recommended to make the sale subject, for a reasonable period  of time, to an option to reverse the sale.

7/2 Excluded  from  the  sale  are  the  insolvent  debtor's tools  of trade; whatever  he  needs  to  continue  his business; a suitable  home  and basic expenses for him  and his dependents. If his home exceeds his requirements, it should be sold and replaced by one that is suitable for him. The same applies mutatis mutandis  to institutions.

7/3 The debtor is not required  to earn or take out a loan if the proceeds of sale are not sufficient to pay off his debts.

8. Distribution of the Insolvent  Debtor's Assets Among the Creditors

8/ 1  It is preferable to expedite the distribution but not with such excessive haste that it harms the insolvent  debtor. It is not necessary to delay the  distribution until  all insolvency  assets are sold. The proceeds may be distributed as and when they are received, which is required if the  creditors  demand  it,  taking  into  consideration the  statutory procedures  of insolvency provided that they do not conflict with the rules and principles of the Sharf'ah are observed



1070





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency

8/2 The judge should start the distribution  with assets that are of the same denomination  as the debt.

8/3 The following order should be observed during distribution:

8/3/1 Priority should be given to paying the fees ofthe administrators and  their  assistants  who  manage  the  process  of sale and distribution.

8/3/2 Next in order should be secured creditors, as per the rules of granting security.

8/3/3  Non-employee contractors (such as tradesmen) and lessors  of transport vehicles are entitled to declare a lien over any of the insolvent debtor's property in their possession in order to recover their full fees from the insolvency assets, and such property reverts to the insolvency assets once the fees are paid.

8/3/4 A person  who finds a specific item of his property  in the insolvency assets has a preferred claim over it. Such property may include safety deposits, portfolios, investment funds, the capital of Mudarabah  or investment agency, and the share of a non-insolvent partner  in a partnership managed  by the institution declared insolvent and the insolvency assets in the case of an insolvent partner.

8/3/5 The rest should be distributed among the creditors, with each creditor receiving an amount pro-rata to his share of the total debt.

8/3/6 If a debt is discovered after the distribution, the new creditor should obtain his share from each of the existing creditors, either by mutual consent or through litigation.

9. Rules Specific to Institutions

9/1  The following items are included in the insolvency assets:

9/1/1 Current accounts held with the institution, because these are liabilities ofthe institution which must be borne by it alone and which should not be borne by the investment accountholders;



1071





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency

9/1/2 All debts outstanding  against the institution.

9/2 Investmentvehicles that are independent ofan {insolvent) institution in their fund sources and revenues are not part of the insolvency assets. Such investment vehicles include restricted  deposits, funds, portfolios and Sukuk assets that are not wholly or partially owned by the institution and in which the institution's responsibility is limited to managing on a paid agency or Mudarabah basis.

9/3 Any assets held by the institution  as custodian, such as securities belonging to third parties and safety deposit boxes, are not part of the insolvency assets.

10. Revoking the Declaration of Insolvency

10/1  Upon distribution of the insolvent debtor's assets to the creditors, the declaration ofinsolvency is revoked by the court and announced according to the requirements of convention or statute.

10/2  After the declaration ofinsolvency is revoked, if an asset is discovered that came into the ownership of the insolvent debtor prior to the declaration ofinsolvency without reciprocal consideration, such as a gift, it is sequestered to be distributed among the creditors whose debts were outstanding  before the declaration  of insolvency. If statute restricts applications for a declaration of insolvency unless after expiry of a limitation period, the outstanding  debt remains a liability of the debtor based on morality/religious credence.

10/3 If the insolvent debtor enters into a credit transaction  after revo• cation of his declaration  of insolvency and then  owns property through  new transactions,  and  is thereafter  declared insolvent a second time, the creditors of the first insolvency are not enti• tled to a share of the assets of the second insolvency. If however, the new property came into his ownership without reciprocal con• sideration, such as a gift, the creditors of the first insolvency are entitled to a share of the assets of the second insolvency based on morality/religious credence.



1072





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency

11. Date of the Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 14 Jumada II, 1431 A.H., corresponding to
28 May 2010 A.D.




















































1073





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted the Standard of Insolvency in its meeting No. (27) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain during the period of 12-14 Jumada II, 1431 A.H., corresponding to 26-28 May 2010 A.D.












































1074





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 14 Jumada II, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 7 June  2009 A.D., the General Secretariat decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Insolvency.

In its meeting held in Dubai,  United Arab Emirates,  on 20 Shawwal
1430 A.H., corresponding to 9 October 2009 A.D., the Sharf'ah Standards Committee discussed the draft of a Sharf'ah Standard on Insolvency and made necessary amendments.

The revised draft ofthe Shari'ah Standard was presented to the Sharf'ah Board in its meeting No. (25) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, during the period  of 2-4 Dhu.1-Qa'dah  1430  A.H.,  corresponding  to 21-23 October
2009 A.D. The amendments that were deemed appropriate were included

The General Secretariat held a public hearing in the Kingdom ofBahrain, on 27 Safar 1431  A.H.,  corresponding to 11  February 2010 A.D.  All the comments made in the public hearing were listened to, and a member of the Shari'ah Board answered these comments and made commentary on them.

In its 26th meeting held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, during the period of24-26 Rabi' I, 1431 A.H., corresponding to 10-12 March 2010 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the amendments proposed by the participants in the public hearing and incorporated  the amendments  that it considered suitable.

In its meeting No. (27) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, during the period of 12-14 Jumada II, 1431  A.H., corresponding to 26-28 May 2010
A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the draft of the Standard, incorporated



1075





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency

the necessary amendments that it deemed appropriate,  and adopted the
Standard.

In its meeting held in  the United Arab Emirates on 7 Sha'ban  1436
A.H., corresponding to 25 May 2015 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Review Committee  reviewed this  Standard.  After deliberation,  the  committee approved necessary amendments, and the  Standard was adopted in  its current amended version.














































1076





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


The basis for prohibiting a person overwhelmed by debts from disposals that harm the creditors is the Hadith,  "Allah will pay (the debts of) a per• son who takes the wealth ofothers with the intention ofrepaying it. But the one who takes it with the intention ofdestroying it, Allah will destroy him".
■  The basis for the obligatory ruling of insolvency and interdiction against the one who has more debts than he can pay is the act of the Prophet (peace be upon him), who interdicted Mu'adh Ibn Jabal (may Allah be pleased with him) and sold his property for the debts against him and distributed  it among his creditors. This is the stance of the majority, who include Abu Yusuf and Muhammad This is also the formal legal opinion of the Hanafis as against Abu Hanifah.
■  The multiplicity ofthree stages is the Maliki opinion, and this is what the (modern) legal codes also uphold. In insolvency, it is essential to consult these rules and the ruling ofthe court.
• The basis for the requirement that the insolvency should be demanded by the owners of due debts is that there is no demand (warranted) for undue debt. Even if such a demand is made of the debtor, he does not have to pay it because the deferred period has a share in the price.
■  The basis for the right of a debtor to request a declaration of his own insolvency is the Shafi'i opinion and the fact that it is in his interest to sta• bilize his financial situation. The Standard excludes fraudulent insolvency according to the satisfaction of the court.
■  The basis for the requirement  of a judicial ruling for insolvency is the act of the Prophet (peace be upon him) in the case of Mu'adh. Also, in-

(2) This has been related by AI-Bayhaqi by both muttasil (fully connected) and mursal (incomplete) chains oftransmission, but the mursal narrations are more correct: "Sunan Al-Bayhaqi" [6: 48]; and "Talkhis AL- Habir [3: 37],  as in "Al-Mawsuah" [5: 301].



1077





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency

solvency needs consideration and Ijtihad; therefore, a judicial decision is required  for it.
■  The basis for non-enforcement of an insolvent's confession  regarding the
right of others to his property -except with the approval of the creditors• and the non-enforcement of his dispositions  that  transfer ownership  is that they prevent harm  to the creditors, as per the Hadith:  "No harm and no reciprocal harm".
■  The basis for the attachment of new dispositions  to the liability of the in• solvent is that the right of the creditor is attached to the property existing at the time of insolvency. Thus there is no harm  in the attachment of new dispositions  to the liability of the debtor because his liability is fit for such a commitment.
■  The basis for the view that gives the creditor the right to reclamation -a view accepted by the Malikis, Shafi'is, Hanbalis and some of the earliest scholars (the Salaf) as well as the majority of (modern  legal) systems- is the Hadith related by Al-Bukhari and Muslimthat affirms the right to recourse for the seller when he finds the exact commodity with the insolvent buyer. He has the option to take it or to leave it and become a partner ofthe creditors in the distribution  of the price. It is subject to the following conditions:
a) The insolvent  should  be alive at the time of recourse. In the case of
an institution or company, it should  remain  existent.
b) The insolvent  remains  liable for all of the compensation due.  If the seller has received part  of it, he will be given an option regarding  the remainder.
c) The whole  asset should  remain  in the  ownership  of the  insolvent.
If all or part  of it has been destroyed,  or if it has left his ownership through sale, or gift, or endowment, the right to reclamation will be cancelled regarding  the remaining part  except when  the transaction involves multiple  parties.
d) The  asset should  not be in  a condition where it is mingled with something from  which  it cannot be distinguished, nor  can its cha• racteristics have changed  to the point  that  the original name  for it no longer  applies or that its value has been  reduced.

(3) See:  "Fath AL-Bari" [5: 66]; and "Sahih Muslim" [3:  1193].



1078





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency

e) The  right  of another  person  should  not  relate to it,  e.g.,  when  the insolvent  has pledged  it as security, except when  the  owner  of the right  (the mortgagee)  renounces  his right to the mortgage.
The  right  to reclamation  is the  cancellation  of the  sale. It can take place verbally  or by a substitute  means.  It takes place immediately and does not  need the decision  of a judge,  or the knowledge  of the competent  authority, or the ability to deliver.
Besides  that,  if the  asset  or its value  or  its  feature  decreased,  or
an inseparable increase occurred in it, like an increase in the weight of livestock, and he chose reclamation, he will only have that. But if the increase  is separate,  it would belong to the insolvent.
The right to reclaim land is not precluded  by any building built on it by the insolvent  nor by any trees he planted  on it. The creditor will be given an option between having the insolvent remove the building and the trees, with the creditor  bearing  liability for any damage  (to what  is moved),  or taking  the building  and  trees  and  paying  their price.  In case of cultivated  land, the crop will remain  until  harvest, free of any charge.
■  The basis for the other view, which does not recognize the right to recla•
mation, is that the Hadith related by Al- Bukhari and Muslim contravenes the implication  of a Shari'ah principle;  i.e., the liability of the insolvent remains operative and the creditor's right regarding that liability remains
stable. This group cited the Hadith:  '.iinyone who died or went insolvent,
and some of his creditors found exactly their property,  they are on a par with the other creditors"•
Mursal Hadiths are valid evidence according to those who take this view. They are Hanafis and some of the Salaf.6°
The basis for non-inclusion of all types of deposits of safekeeping in the insolvency assets is that they are not the property of the insolvent; inter-

(4) This has been related by Al-Daraqutni by a mursal chain oftransmission. See also iil•
Mawsuah AL-Fiqhiyyah [5: 311].
(5) See: "AI-Mawsuah AL-Fiqhiya" [5: 311], for the documentation ofthe reference works of the madhhabs  that affirm the right of reclamation and for the details related to the right ofreclamation.



1079





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency

diction only occurs regarding his property,  not the property of others entrusted to him.
■  The basis for the requirement of a court ruling to rescind the interdiction
of an insolvent is that it demands due consideration and Ijtihad, just as with a declaration of insolvency.

















































1080





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Tsar

The present inability to discharge the financial obligations established in one's liability.

Prudential or Precautionary or Preventive Interdiction
Expedited and streamlined  interdiction  aiming at placing the debtor's assets underjudicial supervision so that the creditor precludes the existence of a threat to his receipt ofthe full payment of his debt.


































1081


























Shari'ah  