Standard No. (44)



Obtaining and Deploying Liquidity












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                           1087
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................      1088

1. Scope of the Standard..............................................................................      1088
2. Definition of Liquidity and Liquidity Management                                1088
3. Need to Utilise Liquidity in Institutions...............................................      1088
4. Obtaining and Deploying Liquidity.......................................................      1088
5.  Liquidity Should Only Be Deployed Using Shari'ah-Compliant Modes ..        1090
6. Date of the Issuance of the Standard......................................................      1091
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1092
Appendices
Appendix (a):  BriefHistory ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1093
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard..................................        1094
Appendix (c):  Definitions............................................................................        1095

























1085








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to define liquidity and the methods  of obtaining, deploying and utilising it within Institutions.co



































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



1087





Shari'ah Standard No (44): Obtainin g and Deploying Liquidity





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard  covers what is meant by liquidity and the permissible means of obtaining and deploying it.

2. Definition  of Liquidity and Liquidity Management

2/1  Liquidity refers to cash or that which can be easily converted to cash.

2/2 Liquidity management means achieving a balance between obtain• ing liquidity as swiftly and cheaply as possible and investing and deploying it effectively.

Liquidity is achieved  in various  ways depending  on where  it is being utilised. For example, in institutions  it is the ability to cover withdrawals; in the money market it is the ability to swiftly convert securities into cash; and with Sukuk and investment funds, it is the ability to redeem or sell them in the secondary market.

3. Need to Utilise Liquidity in Institutions

Institutions need liquidity to meet numerous requirements, such as:

3/1 To distribute profits, which may rely on the liquidation of assets, see Shari'ah Standard No. (40) on Distribution  of Profit in Mudarabah• Based Investment Accounts.

3/2 To discharge liabilities by selling inventory assets and converting them to cash to pay what is owed to creditors, to face contingent liabilities, or liquidate investment vehicles or the institution itself, and similarly to expand its activities, or to achieve capital adequacy or to improve its credit rating, see Sharf'ah Standard No. (43) on Insolvency.

4.  Obtaining and Deploying Liquidity

4/1  Obtaining and deploying liquidity through interest-bearing loans is prohibited by the Shari'ah, whether transacted  directly or through



1088





Shari'ah Standard No (44): Obtainin g and Deploying Liquidity

overdrafts or interest-bearing  or commission-based facilities. Any liquidity support made available by supervisory or regulatory bodies (such as central banks) must be provided only through  Shari'ah• compliant modes, such as Mudarabah and investment agency.

4/2 Permissible modes of obtaining liquidity include:

4/2/1 Selling  commodities  on  a Salam (deferred delivery)  basis, receiving payment up-front, and then purchasing the relevant commodities for delivery on the maturity date. It is permitted to secure a promise to sell (from a third  party commodity broker)  to mitigate the risk of fluctuation between the sale price and purchase price. [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (IO) on Salam and Parallel Salam]

4/2/2 Istisna'a concluding an Istisnaa-based sale contract stipulating advance payment -although advance payment is not obliga• tory- and concluding a parallel Istisna'a-based purchase con• tract stipulating deferred or installment payment. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (11) on Istisna'a and Parallel lstisna'a]

4/2/3 The institution  selling some of its assets for immediate cash and then,  if required, leasing the asset back on rent payable in arrears,  taking  into  consideration  what has been stated in Shari'ah Standard No. (9), item 5/8, on Ijarah and Ijarah Muntahiah Bittamleek.

4/2/4 Financing working capital to expand the institution's activities

This involves the institution inviting investors to participate in financing its working capital on a Mudarabah or Musharakah basis for a specified period oftime determined by its liquidity requirements and with the ability to liquidate the Mudarabah or Musharakah at the end of such period. The investors enter into  the  Mudarabah  or Musharakah  by contributing  their capital while the  institution  contributes  its current  assets, after valuation, as its share ofthe capital ofthe Musharakah or Mudarabah. The institution's fixed assets do not form part of



1089





Shari'ah Standard No (44): Obtainin g and Deploying Liquidity

the Musharakah; rather, fixed assets are either lent or leased to the venture and rental payments are accounted as expenses of the Mudarabah or Musharakah.

4/2/5 Issuing investment Sukuk to expand the institution's activities

This involves issuing the types of investment Sukuk explained in Shari'ah Standard No.  (17) on Investment  Sukuk in order to obtain funds from Sukuk investors and undertake  projects required ofthe institution. The institution may securitise some of its assets by selling them to Sukuk subscribers, managing the assets on their behalf and promising to purchase them at the market price or at a price to be agreed. If the institution is only the lessee and not the manager ofthe Sukuk assets, it may promise to purchase them at face value.

4/2/6 Tawarruq

This should be done in accordance with Sharf'ah Standard No. (30) on Tawarruq.

4/2/7 Interest-free loan

An application  of interest-free loans is outlined  in Shari'ah Standard No. (26) on Islamic Insurance in item 10/8 regarding loans given by the Takaful operator to the Takaful fund.

5. Liquidity Should Only Be Deployed Using Shari'ah-Compliant Modes, which include:
5/1  Purchasing commodities in cash and selling them for deferred payment through Musawamah or Murabahah contracts.

5/2 Leases, lease contracts  that end in ownership  and forward leases, whether for tangible assets or services.

5/3  Purchasing commodities  on a Salam basis (immediate payment for deferred delivery), then  selling them after taking physical or con• structive delivery, whether personally or by appointing the seller, in a separate contract, to sell the commodities to his customers.



1090





Shari'ah Standard No (44): Obtainin g and Deploying Liquidity

5/4  Istisna'a and parallel Istisna'a, which involve the institution commis• sioning the manufacture of products or projects on an Istisna'a basis with immediate payment for deferred delivery upon completion and then selling the same manufactured products to a third party through a second Istisna'a  contract for deferred price and delivery,  without linking the two contracts, or procuring the sale by appointing the manufacturer  as an agent, through a separate contract, to sell the man• ufactured product or project to his customers.

5/5 Musharakah and Mudarabah which involve the institution as the capital provider.

5/6  Investment agency, which involves the institution appointing another institution or those with whom it deals to act as its agents.

5/7 Subscription to purchase Shari'ah-compliant stocks, investment Sukuk or shares in investment funds.

5/8  International commodity trading in the financial markets in accordance with Shari'ah.

5/9  Currency trading in accordance with Shari'ah.

6. Date of the Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 14 Jumada II, 1431 A.H., corresponding to
28 May 2010 A.D.






















1091





Shari'ah Standard No (44): Obtainin g and Deploying Liquidity





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted the Standard of Obtaining and Deploying Liquidity in its meeting No. (27) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain during the period of 12-14 Jumada II, 1431 A.H., corresponding to 26-28 May 2010 A.D.












































1092





Shari'ah Standard No (44): Obtainin g and Deploying Liquidity





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 24 Dhul-Qa'dah  1428  A.H., corresponding to 3  December  2007
A.D., the General Secretariat decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Obtaining and Deploying Liquidity.

In its 25th meeting held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, during the period of
2-4 Dhul-Qadah  1430 A.H., corresponding to 21-23 October 2009 A.D., the Sharf'ah Standards Committee discussed the draft of a Shari'ah Standard on Obtaining and Deploying Liquidity and made the necessary amendments.

The General Secretariat held a public hearing in the Kingdom ofBahrain, on 27 Safar 1431 A.H.,  corresponding  to 11  February 2010 A.D. All the comments made in the public hearing were listened to, and a member ofthe Shari'ah Board answered these comments and made commentary on them.

In its meeting  No. (26) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, during  the period  of 24-26 Rabi' I, 1431  A.H., corresponding  to 10-12 March 2010
A.D.,  the  Sharf'ah Board  discussed  the  amendments   proposed  by the participants  in the public hearing and incorporated the amendments  that it considered suitable.

In its meeting No. (27) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain, during the period of 12-14 Jumada II, 1431 A.H., corresponding to 26-28 May 2010 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the draft ofthe Standard, incorporated the necessary amendments that it deemed appropriate, and adopted the Standard.

In its meeting  held in the United  Arab Emirates,  on 7 Sha'ban  1436
A.H., corresponding to 25 May 2015 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Review Committee  reviewed  this  Standard. After  deliberation, the  committee approved  necessary amendments, and the Standard was adopted  in its current amended version.



1093





Shari'ah Standard No (44): Obtainin g and Deploying Liquidity





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


The basis for the definition ofliquidity as referring to cash and whatever is easily converted into cash is that the traditional terminology for liqui• dity is Tandid  (literally, to convert to cash), actually or by estimation. Actual Tandid means converting commodities into cash by selling them. Tandid by estimation means evaluating commodities in order to arrive at the expected monetary value that can be realized from them.
■  The basis that profit distribution  depends on the availability of liquidity
is that there cannot be any profit except after the protection ofthe capital, and this protection is realized by liquidating the assets.
■  The basis for the prohibition of procuring liquidity through interest-based
loans is the prohibition of any type of Riha (usury). The supervisory bodies are the entities most responsible for overseeing that the institutions' liquidity is compliant with Shari'ah. This is because it is these bodies that have licensed the institutions to operate by Shari'ah-compliant procedures and prohibited them from that which violates the Shari'ah.
■  The basis for the Shari'ah-compliant methods ofobtaining liquidity is pro•
vided in the Sharf'ah standard for each method.
■  The basis for the Shari'ah-compliant methods ofdeploying liquidity is pro•
vided in the Sharf'ah standard for each method.

















1094





Shari'ah Standard No (44): Obtainin g and Deploying Liquidity





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Diversification of Liquidity

The deployment ofliquidity in various instruments; for example, purchas• ing short-term, medium-term and long-term Sukuk to protect investments from sharp fluctuations in the returns.

Liquidity Preference

It means to hold on to cash instead ofdeploying it. That is for the purpose offinancing current purchases, or investing it in securities whose prices are expected to decline, or paying for contingent expenses.

Liquidity Balance

It means reconciling the need to obtain liquidity and the need to deploy it.

Liquidity Surplus

The availability of liquidity exceeding the institution's needs.

Liquidity Deficit

The need for liquidity in order to meet financial requirements.

Good Liquidity

It is based on two principles: The best price and the shortest period for obtaining it.

Liquidity Risk

It is the risk ofhaving to sell commodities or securities at a loss in order to procure liquidity.









1095























