Shari'ah Standard No. (45)



Protection of Capital and Investments












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface...................................................................................................      1101
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................      1102

1. Scope of the Standard..............................................................................      1102
2. Definition of Capital and Investment Protection and the Difference
Between Protection and Guarantee                                                        1102
3. Shari'ah Ruling.........................................................................................      1102
4.  Shari'ah Compliant Means for Protecting Capital........................     1103
5. Shari'ah Non-Compliant Means for Protecting Capital                          1106
6. Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................      1106
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1107
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1108
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard..................................        1110
Appendix (c):  Definitions.............................................................................       1114
























1099








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims at explaining the most important ways ofprotecting capital and investments in Islamic financial Institutions.    It also aims to explain what is permissible according to the Shari'ah and what is not permissible  as well as the Shari'ah basis for it.































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



1101





Sharf'ah Standard  No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers the instruments and methods used to protect capital and investments from loss, decrease and destruction.

2. Definition of Capital and Investment Protection  and the Difference
Between Protection and Guarantee

Protection  of capital and investments  means using available methods to prevent loss, decrease or destruction. It is wider than a guarantee of invested capital, as a guarantee is an undertaking by a particular party to bear any loss, decrease or destruction of the capital. On the other hand, protection refers to the safeguarding of capital.

3. Shari'ah Ruling

3/1  Protecting capital by permissible means is desirable in Sharf'ah as it serves the objectives of Sharf'ah with regard to wealth.
3/2 It is compulsory for an investment manager, whether he is a Mudarib, an investment agent or a managing partner, in his fiduciary capacity, to exercise due diligence to protect the funds from loss, decrease or destruction. If he fails to do so using usual means ofprotection, he is liable (for loss), taking into consideration items 4/1 and 7/1.

3/3 It is permissible to use Sharf'ah-compliant instruments and processes to protect investment from risks that it may be exposed to whether they are risks relating to a loss ofcapital, depreciation in value, inflation, or the fluctuation of exchange rates, etc.

3/4 The investment manager acts in a fiduciary capacity with regard to the funds.  He is not liable for loss of capital except in case of his wilful misconduct, negligence or breach of contractual terms and conditions.



1102





Sharf'ah Standard  No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments

3/5 The efforts exerted by the investment manager to grow the capital must be suitable for the nature of the relevant investment. It is also incumbent  on him  to  take professional measures that  normally provide suitable protection  for the  funds.  Otherwise, he will  be deemed negligent.

3/6 It is not permissible to stipulate in an investment agreement that the investment manager is unconditionally liable for any loss of capital in cases other than willful misconduct, negligence and breach of contractual terms and conditions.

3/7 Ifa loss occurs caused bythe Mudaribs wilfulmisconduct, negligence or breach of contract, the capital provider may hold the Mudarib liable for the loss of capital but not the loss of profit. However,  if it is determined through actual or constructive liquidation that the investment accrued profit which was added to the capital and then suffered a loss due to the Mudarib's wilful misconduct,  negligence or breach of contract, the Mudarib is liable to idemnify for loss of that profit as it has become a part of the capital  If destruction  of the whole or a part of the capital is caused by the Mudarib's wilfil misconduct, negligence or breach of contract, the Mudarib is liable for the value ofthe capital

4. Shari'ah Compliant Means for Protecting Capital

4/1  Instruments and processes used to protect capital and investments must fulfill the following  conditions:

4/1/1  The investment  partners  should bear the  risks and losses according to their respective shares in the capital.

4/1/2 The objective should not be to hold the investment manager liable in cases other than willful misconduct, negligence or breach of contract.

4/1/3 The means adopted for capital protection must not be a non• Shari'ah compliant contract and should not be a pretext to achieve an objective violating Shari'ah.



1103





Sharf'ah Standard  No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments

4/2 Some permissible methods of protecting capital include:

4/2/1  Takaful  (Islamic insurance) for the investment to protect the capital or cover the risks  of willful  misconduct,  negligence, breach  of contract, procrastination, death  or bankruptcy. Takaful  coverage  may be  obtained either by the  investors themselves or through the investment manager on their behalf.
4/2/2 Obtaining Takaful cover for the leased assets underlying the Sulcuk or other instruments against the risk of destruction and for major maintenance.
4/2/3 An undertaking provided by Takaful institutions to guarantee exports and investments.
4/2/4 A voluntary undertaking by a third party acting in the public interest, such as the state, or relevant public interest autho• rities, such as a guardian, executor or father, to indemnify against a loss of capital without any right of recourse to the investment manager, such as a government pledge in respect of an investment  project.  In order for this undertaking  to be valid, the third  party  should be administratively  inde• pendent  of the investment manager and there should be no direct or indirect ownership relationship of more than a half between the investment manager and the third party.
4/2/5 An undertaking  by a third party to indemnify against a loss of capital resulting  from  the  investment  manager's  wilful misconduct  or negligence without  receiving consideration for providing such a guarantee. However, the guarantor has the right of recourse to the investment manager.
4/2/6 Creating reserves to protect the capital through  deductions from the investors' share ofprofits but not from the investment manager's share of profits due to him in his capacity as the Mudarib.
4/2/7  Diversifying the investment assets to achieve an appropriate return and minimize risks. This may include:



1104





Sharf'ah Standard  No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments

a) Combining  real assets, such as real estate and commodities with financial assets (such as stocks and Sukuk) or combining assets denominated  in two different currencies.
b) Dividing the capital into two parts by deploying the capital in Murabahah and Musharakah contracts,  respectively.
The first part  is used in Murabahah contracts  with parties that have strong credit ratings in a way that the combination of the  principal  amount   and  the  profit  of Murabahah protect the initial capital and the second part  is invested in Musharakah  contracts.
c) Dividing the capital into two parts by deploying the capital in Ijarah and Musharakah contracts  respectively.
The first part  is used  in Ijarah  contracts  with parties  that have  strong  credit  ratings  in  a way that  the  combination of the principal  amount  and the rental amount  protect  the initial capital and the second part is invested in Musharakah contracts.
d) Dividing  the capital into two parts  and deploying them  in
Murabahah and 'Arboun contracts  respectively.

The first part  is used in Murabahah  contracts with parties that have strong credit ratings in a way that the combination of the principal amount and the profit of Murabahah protect the  initial  capital.  The  second  part   is  used  in  'Arboun contracts to purchase assets.  If the value of the assets rises, the purchase contracts are completed and the assets are sold for a profit. If the value of the assets declines,  the purchase contracts  are not  completed  and  the loss is limited  to the amount of the 'Arboun, while the capital is protected by the Murabahah  contracts.  It is compulsory  in  this  method  to observe the Shari'ah rules relating to 'Arboun. This includes the requirement to reserve the assets sold under the 'Arboun contract from the time of contract conclusion until the settlement date and the impermissibility oftrading in 'Arboun contracts.  [see Shari'ah Standard No. (53) on 'Arboun]



1105





Sharf'ah Standard  No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments

4/2/8  Taking  security  and  guarantees  in  Murabahah,  Salam or
Istisna'a contracts to ensure that debts are paid.
4/2/9 A  sale  with  an  option  to  terminate  due  to  non-payment
(Khiyar al-Naqd).

4/2/10 It is permissible to use other  permissible instruments  and processes with the consent ofthe investor to protect the capital from risks, whether those risks are related to the destruction of the  original  investment  capital,  depreciation  in  value, inflation or the fluctuation of exchange rates, etc.
4/2/11  If the investor has required the investment manager to adopt certain  Shari'ah-compliant ways  to protect  the  capital,  the manager is obligated to do so. Ifhe does not do so, he is liable for any resulting loss of capital, in accordance with item 4/4.

5. Shari'ah Non-Compliant Means for Protecting  Capital

It is not permissible to protect the capital by Sharf'ah-non-compliant means or means that result in violations of the Shari'ah, such as:

5/1  Stipulating that the investment manager is liable for loss of capital.

5/2 An undertaking by a third party to indemnify for loss ofcapital in the cases other than wilful misconduct or negligence of the investment manager with a right (of the third party) to have recourse to the investment manager.

5/3 A commitment by or obligating the investment manager to purchase the investment assets at their nominal price or at a price that was initially agreed upon.

5/4 An undertaking by a third party to guarantee the capital for a fee.
This is a form of conventional insurance.

5/5 Protecting the capital by use of conventional hedging contracts such as futures, options and swaps.

6. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 24 Dhul-Qa'dah 1431 A.H., corresponding to 30 November 2010 A.D.



1106





Sharf'ah Standard  No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted this Standard in its meeting No. (28) held
in the Kingdom of Bahrain during the period of 22-24 Dhul-Qa'dah 1431
A.H., corresponding to 27-29 May 2011 A.D.













































1107





Sharf'ah Standard  No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 24 Dhul-Qadah 1428  A.H.,  corresponding to 20 December 2007
A.D., the General Secretariat decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Protection of Capital and Investments.
In its meeting held in Kuwait, on 20 Shawwal 1430 A.H., corresponding to 9 February 2009 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee discussed the draft of a Shari'ah Standard on Protection of Capital and Investments and made necessary amendments.

The revised draft ofthe Shari'ah Standard was presented to the Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. (24) held in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, during the period of 25-27 Jumada II, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 18-20 June
2010 A.D. The amendments that were deemed appropriate were included.

The  General  Secretariat  held  a public  hearing  in  the  Kingdom of
Bahrain,  on  27 Safar  1431  A.H.,  corresponding  to  11  February  2010
A.D. All the comments made in the public hearing were listened to, and a member  of the Sharf'ah Board answered these comments and made commentary on them.

In its meeting No. (26) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, during the period of 24-26 Rabf' I,  1431  A.H., corresponding to 10-12  March 2010
A.D.,  the  Shari'ah  Board discussed the  amendments  proposed  by the participants in the public hearing and incorporated the amendments that it considered suitable.

In its meeting No. (28) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain during the period of 22-24 Dhul-Qadah 1431 A.H., corresponding to 28-30 November 2010
A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the draft of the Standard, incorporated



1108





Sharf'ah Standard  No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments

the necessary amendments that it deemed appropriate,  and adopted the
Standard.

In its meeting held in Al-Madinah Al-Minawwarah, on 30 Sha'ban 1436
A.H., corresponding to 17 June 2015 A.D., the Sharf'ah Standards Review Committee  reviewed this  Standard.  After  deliberation, the  committee approved necessary amendments, and the Standard was adopted  in  its current amended version.














































1109





Sharf'ah Standard No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


■    The basis for capital protection being a desirable objective is the Divine Command to  adopt ways  and  means  to  protect  wealth  like  having witnesses  and  documentation  of the  financial  contracts and  securing debt with  mortgages  and  the  like. Protection of wealth  is one  of the essential objectives that the Shari'ah has taken care of.
■  The  basis  for the  obligation  of the  manager  to  take  due  diligence  to
protect the investment  is that his role regarding the investment  is that of a fiduciary. This means that he should manage the investment in a way that serves the interest of the capital provider  in his capacity of his fiduciary representative. He should thus use prudent means consistent with accepted standard practice to increase the funds.
■  The basis for using permissible means to protect the investment is that all
(financial) contracts  are permissible  by default unless proved otherwise. Furthermore, these instruments achieve the intent of the Shari'ah to safe• guard wealth.
■  The basis for the investment  manager  not being liable for the loss of the
capital, except in  cases of his wilful  misconduct  and  negligence  is the consensus ofMuslim jurists. That is because he takes the capital with the owner's permission  and deals with it in the interest ofthe capital provider. He is thus  the  capital provider's  representative  in  terms  of possessing and managing the capital. This means that the loss or destruction of the capital in his possession  is just like its loss or destruction while in the possession of its owner because he took it with his permission. Moreover, no person, including the manager is liable to anything without a specific command  by Sharf'ah.

(2) "AI-Bahr AL-Ra'iq" [6: 313];  "AL-Bahjah Sharh AL-Tuhfah" [2: 217]; "Mayyarah 'AlaAL•
'Asimiyyah" [2: 131]; and "AL-Mughni" [7: 76].



1110





Sharf'ah Standard No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments

■  The basis for the impermissibility to stipulate  an absolute  guarantee  to be provided  by the  manager,  is that  this  condition   strips  partnership (Mudarabah and  Musharakah)  and  agency  contracts  of their  essential content, and turns them into a guaranteed  loan contract. Moreover, these contracts  are based  upon  trusteeship,  and this  condition  violates their nature  and implications;  hence, it is void. Ibn Qudamah said, "The third type (i.e., of invalid conditions)  is to stipulate what is not in the interest of the contract nor consistent with its nature and implications; e.g., stipu• lating that the partner is liable for the capital or for a share of the loss. There is no disagreement  among the jurists that this condition  is void.
■   The basis for the opportunity cost not being compensated in the events of
wilful misconduct or negligence is that it is non-existent wealth which has not been realised yet. However, realized profit after actual or constructive liquidation  is treated  like capital.
Shari'ah-Compliant Means for Protecting  Capital
■    The basis for stipulating  equality among the partners  in bearing  loss is that  partnership is based  on equality between  the  partners. Stipulating that some partners  should bear the loss more than  others should violates the nature and implications of a partnership contract. Bearing the portion of loss that  is supposed  to be borne  by another  partner causes the latter partner  to gain profit  from  that  for which  he has assumed  no liability. The jurists  agree that loss sharing in the partnership contract  should be proportional to capital (contribution).6
■  The basis for the permissibility to protect the capital with Takaful against any type of investment risks is that Takaful is an undertaking to make donations between the participants. It is not a contract to exchange counter-values (Mu'awadah).  Its purpose  is to achieve cooperation  and solidarity among the participants.  Hence, the Sharf'ah prohibitions that apply to (conventio• nal) commercial insurance do not apply to it.
■  The basis for the permissibility  of a third  party's undertaking to bear the loss without the right of recourse to the manager is that, according to the

(3) AL-Mghni" [5: 41].
(4) "AL-Mabsut" [15: 84]; "AL-Bahjah Sharh A1-Tuhfah" [2: 217];  "AL-Hawi AL-Kabir" [9:  113];
and "AL-Maughnr" [7: 179].
(5) "Bada't' Al-Sana'i" [7: 517]; "Hashiyat Al-Dusuqt" [3: 353]; "Tuhfat AL-Muhtaj" [5: 292];
and "A-Furu" [4: 403].



1111





Sharf'ah Standard No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments

Shari'ah, this is an undertaking to make a voluntary donation. Therefore, it is permissible by the Sharf'ah provided that the third party is independent from the manager so that his undertaking does not result in the manager becoming the guarantor.
■  The basis for permissibility  of deducting  reserve amounts  (from  the
profits) is that it is done with the consent of the relevant parties and is in the investors' interest as it strengthens the investment's financial situation. No deduction should be made from the manager's share because the liability for loss is borne by the capital providers, not by the manager.
■  The basis for the permissibility of diversifying investment assets is that diversification  achieves the interest  of the investors. It does not  fall under the prohibition  of combining contracts in one contract because each contract  is conducted  independently of the other, whereby the manager divides the capital into parts and each part is invested independently in one type of contract or investment  asset that differs from what the other portion  ofthe capital is invested in. This is for the purpose  of mitigating  risks and diversifying returns.  The parameters for each of these contracts may be sought by referring to the relevant Shari'ah Standard.
■  The basis for the permissibility of obtaining securities and guarantees
for deferred payment contracts  is the Quranic Verse:  {"And ifyou  are on a journey and cannotfind a scribe, then (you may resort to holding
somethingas) mortgage, taken into possession},and {"...who produces
it is (the reward of) a camel load; I guarantee it}.
■  The basis for the liability of the manager to bear the loss if he violates the Shari'ah-compliant conditions stipulated by the capital provider is the Quranic Verse: {"O you who believe! Fulfil (your) obligations}."
• Fulfilling contractual obligations requires the fulfilment ofthe conditions stipulated in them. The Prophet (peace be upon him) said,  "Muslims are

(6) [Al-Baqarah (The Cow): 283].
(7) [Yusuf (The Prophet Joseph): 72]. (8) [A1-Ma 'idah (The Table): 1].



1112





Sharf'ah Standard No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments

bound by their conditions (stipulated in contracts  and undertakings). Breaching these conditions  amounts  to negligence from the manager. Hence,  it is compulsory  upon  him to bear  any loss arising from this breach.
Shari'ah Non-Compliant Means for Protecting  Capital
■  The basis for the prohibition of a third party's undertaking to bear the loss with the right of recourse to the manager is that this condition results in making the manager liable for the loss, which is prohibited by the Shari'ah.
■    The basis for prohibiting  the manager  from undertaking to buy the investment assets at their face value or at a value initially agreed upon is that this condition results in the manager undertaking to bear the partial or complete loss of the assets' value, which is a forbidden condition  as aforementioned.
■  The basis for the prohibition ofa third party's guarantee for a fee received in exchange for the guarantee is that it firstly entails excessive ambiguity because the extent ofthe loss is unknown at the inception ofthe contract, and because giving a guarantee in exchange for a fee, is prohibited by the Shari'ah.
a  See Shari'ah  Standard No.  (20) on Sale of Commodities  in Organized
Markets for the basis ofthe prohibition oftrading in options, futures and swaps.








(9) Related by Al-Tirmidhi from the Hadith of Amr  Ibn 'Awf, may Allah be pleased with him, in "Kitab Al-Ahkam",  Chapter on "Ma Dhukira  'An  Rasuli Allah, peace be upon him, Fi Al-Sulh", No. (1272); it is related also by Abu Dawud from the Hadith of Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, in "Kitab Al-Aqdiyah, Chapter on "Bab Fi AI-Sulh", No. {3120); also it is related by Al-Darqutni from the Hadith of'A' ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, with the addition of "...that which is consistent with the truth", [2: 3]. It is an authentic Hadith when all its chains oftransmission are taken into consideration; "Taghliq AI-Ta'liq" [3: 280]; and "Fath AL-Bari" [4: 451].
(10) See Resolution No.  (63)  1/7 of the International  Islamic Fiqh Academy regarding
Financial Markets.



1113





Sharf'ah Standard  No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Wilful Misconduct by the Manager
Wilful misconduct by the manager that renders him liable is to do what he is not allowed to according to the dictates ofthe Shari'ah, or the contract, or customary practice.
Negligence by the Manager
Negligence by the manager that renders him liable is to fail to do what it is required ofhim by the Sharf'ah, or the contract, or customary practice.



































1114





















