Shari'ah Standard No. (40)



Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                             993
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................        994

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               994
2. Investment Accounts (Demand Deposits)............................................        994
3. Realization of Profit.................................................................................       998
4. Entitlement to Profit.................................................................................      1000
5. Distribution  of Profit................................................................................      1002
6. Other Rulings on Investment Accounts                                                  1003
7. Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................      1004
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1005
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1006
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard...................................       1008
Appendix (c):  Definitions............................................................................       1012























991








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to indicate the controls and rulings on distribution of profits of investment accounts in Islamic financial institutions (Institution/ Institutions)."  In  this  regard  the  standard  covers three  major  aspects including: realization of profit, entitlement to profit and profit distribution.































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



993





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers investment  accounts  managed  on the basis of Mudarabah  and the principles and conditions of realization and entitlement  to profit. The Standard also covers how profits are to be distributed  between the institution  as a Mudarib  and the holders  of investment  accounts  as Arbab al-Mal, and to discuss the procedural aspects ofprofit realization such as determination of the expenses to be charged to investment accounts and the allocations and reserves to be deducted from the profits. The standard  does not cover the accounts managed  on the basis of investment  agency because such accounts require a separate standard.

2. Investment Accounts (Demand Deposits)

2/1  Definition and types of investment accounts

These are the amounts which the institution  receives from inves• tors  on  the basis of participatory  Mudarabah  (al-Mudarabah al• Mushtarakah). The holders of such accounts delegate the institution to invest their funds through Mudarabah. Investment accounts can be divided into two types. The first type is investment accounts that are managed on the basis of unrestricted Mudarabah where the Mudarib is delegated to invest the Mudarabah funds in any field ofinvestment he deems suitable. The second type is investment accounts which are managed on the basis of restricted Mudarabah, where the Mudarib has to invest the Mudarabah funds in a specific type of investment to be determined by Rab al-Mal (owner of the capital). The relationship between the holders ofthese accounts and the institution is the typical relationship between the Mudarib (the work provider) and Rab al• Mal.



994





Shari' ah Standard No. (40 ): Di stribution of Profit in Mudarabah -Based Investm ent Accoun ts

2/1/1  Unrestricted investment accounts

These are the amounts received from investors who authorize the institution to invest their funds on the basis ofMudarabah without restricting the investment of such funds to a specific project or investment program. The holders of the accounts and the institution share the profit, ifany, according to the ratio specified for each ofthem either in the Mudarabah contract or in the application for opening the account. The holders of the accounts bear all the losses in proportion  to their respective shares in the capital, except losses arising from transgression, negligence or breach of the contract, which have to be borne by the institution.

2/1/2 Restricted investment accounts

These are the amounts whose owners authorize the institu• tion to invest them on the basis of Mudarabah  in a specific project or investment program. The holder of the account and the institution  share the profit, if any, according to the ratio  specified for each of them  either  in the Mudarabah contract  or in the application for opening the account. The holder ofthe account bears all the losses in proportion to his share in the capital, except losses arising from transgression, negligence or breach of contract, which have to be borne by the institution.

2/1/3 Equality in investment opportunities

In principle, equality in investment opportunities  should be ensured between shareholders'  funds  and the  funds  of the holders ofthe investment accounts in participatoryMudarabah. In case a different policy is to be adopted, the institution should disclose that before disposition, with due consideration to the relevant regulatory restrictions and the conditions of opening the accounts.

(2) Restricted investment accounts can be managed on the basis of investment agency.



995





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

2/2 The difference between an investment  account and a current account and its likes

2/2/1 The current accounts are the amounts which the institution receives from clients who are not seeking investment.  Such amounts represent loans which the institution has to guarantee their repayment on demand without any increment. The institution has the right to dispose ofsuch amounts and invest them  for its own benefit and under  its own responsibility, preferably after indicating this in the application for opening the account.   As regards investment accounts, these are the amounts deposited with the institution  on trust  basis, and hence the  institution  is not  committed  to  guarantee  their repayment,  except in  case of transgression,  negligence or breach of the contract.

2/2/2 The institution should guarantee full repayment of the amounts of the current  accounts to their holders,  whereas it should not  assume the  commitment  to  pay any fixed or variable increment on the principal amounts of such accounts, because such payment constitutes usurious interest. The institution is not committed to guarantee investment accounts. It is only committed to distribute their profit or loss among their holders as per the ratios agreed upon.

2/2/3 Saving accounts which carry no authorization  for investing them to the benefit of their holders shall become subject to the rulings on current  accounts, whereas those which carry such authorization  shall become  subject to the  rulings on investment accounts.

2/2/4 The institution may charge fees (commissions) for the services of opening investment accounts.  Such  fee has to be a lump

(3) For more rulings on current accounts as regards, for instance, charging fees for keeping such accounts or distribution of prizes to them see Shari'ah Standard No. (19) on Loan (Qard).



996





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

sum amount which should preferably not exceed the average actual cost, and should be charged once at the time of opening the account.

2/2/5 In case of depositing coins or paper money by handing them over to the cashier the institution may charge a fee for trans• portation, storage and counting  of the deposited  amounts. This, however, does not include amounts  transferred  to the account ofthe institution.

2/2/6 In transference ofmoney between accounts constructive pos• session is sufficient, whether  for the same currency  or dif• ferent currencies, because the process involves exchange and transference.  [see Shari'ah Standard No.  (1) on Trading  in Currencies]

2/2/7 The funds which the institution  fails to transfer  to owners because of change of address shall be kept  in a suspended account for the specified period  before being added to the charity account. If the addresses of the owners of such funds came to be known later on the funds should be paid out to them from the charity account. In this regard, a clause should be added to the conditions for opening the accounts indicating that the holders of the accounts agree to donate for charitable purposes any amounts which could not be transferred to them within a specific period due to change of address.

2/2/8 In principle, the institution should resort, through  exchange of correspondence, to holders of the accounts when there is any change in the conditions or profit sharing ratios. However, due to the difficulty and cost involved in such process the institution may send notifications, or advertise the new changes in its website so that the implicit acceptance of the concerned parties is obtained if no protest is received from them within a specific period. The changes in question, which shall become  effective starting  from  the  beginning  of the next period, should be incorporated  in the conditions of the



997





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

accounts,  with due reference to the procedure  followed for their adoption.

2/2/9 It is permissible  to stipulate  the  authoritative  status  of the documents  and financial statements ofthe institution, unless such documents  and statements are proved to be wrong by the accountholder. If dispute  arises the two parties  should resort to experts, arbitration  or law.

2/2/10 The cost ofproving the accusation shall be borne by the accoun•
tholder when he files the claim against the institution.

3. Realization of Profit

Realization of distributable profits should be subject to the following:

3/1  Safety of the capital

3/1/1  Realization ofprofit in investment accounts does not take place before protecting the capital. Any amount ofprofit distributed before ensuring such protection  is considered as an advance payment, rather than realized profit [see item 5/3]. The profit authorized for investment at the end of the investment period is considered as part of the capital in the next period.

3/1/2 Actual and constructive liquidation

Realization of profit  in investment  accounts  does not  take place before the following steps:

3/1/2/1 Liquidation of Mudarabah assets, which can be either actual liquidation where all the assets are converted into cash and all debts are collected, or it can be constructive liquidation where, in addition to cash amounts, noncash assets are valued by experts,  along with valuation of all debts with regard to possibilities of collection and appropriate allocations for bad debts.

3/1/2/2  Covering of the following expenses:
a) Expenses relating to utilization of the balances of the investment accounts by charging each operation with the direct expenses incurred in its execution.



998





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

b) The share ofthe balances ofthe investment accounts from shared expenses, excluding expenses relating to the institution's  own activities.
Investment accounts should also not be charged with the expenses ofthe tasks which have to be performed by the Mudarib. Such expenses include the expenses ofthe investment departments and the bodies which endorse their decisions as well as the expenses of the follow-up  and  accounting  departments. It is also permissible  to  specify  a ceiling for the  expenses above which all the expenses are to be borne by the Mudarib.

3/1/2/3 Deduction of the allocations and reserves relating to the investment, from investment  income so as to arrive at distributable profit. In this case, allocations for bad debts and reserve for rate of returns have to be deducted from gross profit, whereas reserve for investment risks has to be deducted after deduction of the Mudarib's share.

3/2  In realization of the profit the following  should be observed

3/2/1 When  loss is incurred  in one Mudarabah operation  it can be covered from the profits of other operations, and if it exceeds the  profits  it  should be  covered  from  capital. What  should really matter  is the  final  result  of liquidation   at the  end  of the  financial  period  specified by the  institution.  The loss of a certain  financial  period  should  not  be  covered  from  the
profits of another period,  except in the case of covering losses from reserves.

3/2/2 Due  to  the  fact  that  unrestricted  investment  accounts   of continuous  participatory  Mudarabah  lack  coincidence   in the beginnin g and end of the process  of depositing funds  in the  accounts,  the  profit from  the  operations which  extend to succeeding  periods  has to be distributed over the  whole period of such  operations in proportion to the  duration of each operation.



999





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

4. Entitlement to Profit

4/1  The method  of profit distribution  should be well known so that no room is left for uncertainty and dispute. Distribution of profits should also be in terms of ratios, and not at all by specifying a lump sum amount or a percentage ofthe capital for any party, or any other method that could lead to avoidance ofsharing ofthe profit between the two parties.

4/2 Specification of profit  ratios  for the  two parties  should  not  be postponed beyond the time of signing the contract. When the two parties do not specify such ratios at the time of signing the contract normal practice can be sought - if any - as when, for instance, profit is normally shared  on equal basis.  If there is no normal practice to resort to the Mudarabah  contract becomes null and void, the Mudarib is entitled to the wage normally paid for similar work, and the whole profit goes to Rab al-Mal.

4/3 The institution can specify different ratios for distribution of profits between  itself and  different  categories of holders  of investment accounts, or it can specify a unified ratio for all  The ratios  for distribution ofprofits among the holders ofthe investment accounts can also be unified or varying on the basis of certain weights.

4/4 When one ofthe two parties stipulates a lump sum amount for himself the Mudarabah  contract  becomes null and void. This restriction, however, does not include the case when the two parties agree that if the profit exceeds certain limit or index the excess amount should be taken by one of them. If the profit is at that limit/index or below it shall be shared as agreed upon between the two parties.

4/5 It is impermissible to earmark the profit of a specific type or portion of the capital or the assets into which capital is converted, for one of the two parties.  It is also impermissible to allocate the profit of a certain financial period or a specific transaction for one party, and the profit ofanother financial period or a specific transaction for the other.



1000





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

4/6 The method agreed upon for distribution of profit can be fixed for the whole period, or variable according to specific sub-periods of partial liquidation.

4/7  When the Mudarib mixes the Mudarabah funds with his own funds, he becomes a partner by subscribing his funds and a Mudarib for the Mudarabah funds of the other party. In this case the profit has to be divided between the two amounts ofcapital, so that the Mudarib can get the profit ofhis work as well as the profit ofhis funds as a partner. The profit share of the Mudarib as a partner  shall become subject to the same treatment  of the shares of the holders of investment accounts.  [see item 4/3]

4/8 In principle, the profit belongs to the institution and the holder of the account, yet the two parties can agree on allocation of a certain part ofthe profit to the benefit ofa third party. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (13) on Mudarabah, item 8]

4/9 It is permissible for the accountholder to exit from the Mudarabah with all his funds or part of them.  Such  exit represents the desire of the accountholder to redeem his share in the Mudarabah assets without withdrawing the total amount deposited in his account or part of it. It is permissible for the institution in this case to specify the amount relating to the exit so that it can earn no profit, or less than the profit it would have earned in the absence of exit. Such arrangement  constitutes exit on the basis of supply and demand, rather than deprivation from profit.

4/10 The ratios of the amounts  deposited in the investment  accounts which the institution retains for liquidity purposes - may be stated in the conditions ofthe accounts - has to be treated as follows:

4/10/1 The case could be that the bank never invests such amounts because they are withheld in the accounts ofthe central bank or the bank's treasury for the sake of meeting requests for withdrawal from investment accounts, hence there is no re• turn for which a ruling can be indicated here.



1001





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

4/10/2 Or  the  case may  be  that  the  bank  utilizes  such  funds  in short  term  or  easy-to-liquidate  investments  so as to  cater for applications for withdrawal  from  investment  accounts  • although  the  bank  sometimes  stipulates  in  the  conditions of the  accounts  that  such funds  are allocated  for liquidity purposes. In this case it is permissible for the bank  to invest such funds without obtaining the consent ofthe holders ofthe accounts, because the bank is authorized  for any disposition that serves the interest of the two parties of the unrestricted Mudarabah  contract.  When  a return  is earned  from  such investment  it should be added  to the investment  base. The holders of the account will be entitled to a share in this profit in their capacity as Arbab al-Mal, and the bank is entitled to its share as a Mudarib, subject to the ratios  agreed upon. If, instead, a loss is incurred  from investment  of the amounts, without any transgression  or negligence from the side of the bank, it should  be borne  by the holders  of the accounts  in their capacity as Arbab al-Mal.

5. Distribution  of Profit

5/1  Application of scoring method of profit distribution:

With due consideration to items 4/3 and 4/4, the scoring method for distribution  of profit among the participants  of general investment accounts  can be used. Such method takes into account the amount contributed  by  each  investor   and  the  period   of its  stay  in  the investment  (currency  unit  x  time  unit).  Each  account  is  given a certain number of scores depending on its amount  and the period of stay  of that  amount  in  the  investment even  if depositing and withdrawal have repeatedly been done and the amount varied from time  to time. The holders  of the accounts  are considered  to have implicitly exchanged mutual  relief from commitment (Mubara 'ah) for any aspects that practically cannot be catered for.

5/2  There  is no prohibition against setting  an expected  rate  of return which is not considered  to be binding  if not achieved,  even if it is



1002





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

reached  through  a feasibility study.  However,  final  distribution of profits should be based on realization of profit after actual or constructive liquidation, rather than on such expected rate ofreturn.
5/3 It is permissible to pay advance amounts to the holders ofthe accounts before actual or constructive liquidations so that final settlement can be made later on. After actual or constructive liquidation the institution is committed to make necessary additions to,  or deductions from, the advanced amounts so that each holder of an investment account receives his exact share of the profit.

5/4 Mutual relieffrom commitments (Mubara' ah) in case ofexit should be stipulated in the contracts of the Mudarabah-based  investment accounts.  The  stipulation  should  indicate  that  the  exiting party reliefs the holders ofthe accounts (the depositors) from commitment towards his rights in any undistributed  or non-apparent  profit, as well as his rights in the remaining part ofthe reserves for investment risks and rate of return,  and the remaining part of allocations for debts. Similarly, the stipulation should state that the holders of the accounts  relief the  exiting party  from  commitment  towards  any losses that have not yet become apparent. The stipulation should also indicate that on liquidation  of the investment base the remaining parts  of the  above mentioned  reserves and  allocations  shall be devoted to charitable purposes.

5/5 Institutions should liquidate Mudarabah and distribute the realized profit  between  the  Mudarib  and  the  holders  of the  investment accounts according to the conditions ofthe Mudarabah contract.

5/6 When the shareholders in their capacity as the Mudarib,  decide • after liquidation ofthe Mudarabah and preparation ofthe profit and loss account - to relinquish part oftheir profit share to the benefit of the accountholders, the institution should disclose that.

6. Other Rulings on Investment Accounts

The rulings which have not been stipulated in this Standard can be seen in Sharf'ah Standard No. (13) on Mudarabah.



1003





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

7. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 26 Jumada II, 1430 A.H., corresponding to
19 June 2009 A.D.




















































1004





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts





Adoption of the Standard


The  Sharf'ah  Board adopted  the  Standard  on  Investment  accounts and Profit Distribution on its meeting No. (24), held in Al-Madinah Al• Munawwarah,  on 25-26  Jumada  II,  1430  A.H., corresponding to  18-19
June 2009 A.D.











































1005





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No.  (10) held on 2-7  Rabi' I, 1424 A.H., corresponding to 3-8 May 2003 A.D., in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah, Kingdom ofSaudi Arabia, the Sharf'ah Board decided to issue a Shari'ah Standard on bank deposits and distribution ofprofits .

On 7 Dhul-Hajjah 1424 A.H., corresponding to 29 January 2004 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee (1) decided to commission a Sharf'ah consultant to prepare a study on bank deposits and distribution of profits.

In its meeting No. (16) held on 8-9 Jumada I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 15-16 June 2005 A.D., in the Kingdom OfBahrain, the Shari'ah Standards Committee ( 1) discussed the draft ofthe Standard and introduced necessary changes.

In its meeting No. (17) held on 8-9 Sha'ban 1426 A.H., corresponding to 8-9  September 2005 A.D., in the Kingdom of Bahrain, the  Shari'ah Standard Committee (1) discussed the draft ofthe Standard and introduced necessary changes.

In its meeting No.  (15) held on 22 Sha'ban  1426  A.H., corresponding to  30  September 2005  A.D., in Makkah Al-Mukarramah,  the  Sharf'ah Board discussed the draft of the Standard,  and decided,  in the light of the discussions and observations of the meeting, to send the draft of the Standard to Shari'ah Standards Committee (1) for study.

In a meeting held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on 1   Safar 1427 A.H., corresponding to 1  March 2006 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) discussed the draft of the Standard and introduced necessary changes in the light ofthe observations of the meeting.



1006





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

In its meeting No. (17) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, on 26 Shawwal
1427 A.H., corresponding to 18 November 2006 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed the amendments suggested by the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) and introduced necessary changes.

In  its meeting No. (22) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain,  on 28-30
Dhul-Qadah  1430  A.H.,  corresponding  to 26-28  November 2008  A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the draft of the Standard and introduced necessary changes.

The Secretarial General ofAAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 6 Rabi' II, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 2 April 2009 A.D. More than 30 participants attended the public hearing as representatives of central banks, institutions, and accounting firms. The public hearing was also attended by Shari'ah scholars, university teachers and other interested parties. Several observations were made in the public hearing, and duly responded to by the members of the Shari'ah Standards  Committees (1) and (2).

In its meeting No. (23) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on 15--17 Rabf' I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 12-15 March 2009 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed the draft ofthe Standard and introduced necessary changes.

In its meeting No. (24) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah, on 25-26
Jumada II, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 18-19 June 2009 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the draft of the Standard, introduced necessary changes and adopted the Standard.


















1007





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


The current account is considered as a loan because the bank has to guar• antee its repayment  on demand.  In this regard the International Islam• ic Fiqh Academy issued its resolution  No. 86 (9/3) which stipulates that "Demand  deposits  (current accounts) whether  in Islamic or traditional banks are loans in the strict Shari'ah sense. The receiving bank holds such deposits under guarantee and is committed  by Sharf'ah to repay them on demand.  The fact that the receiving bank  is solvent does not affect this
ruling"

Rulings and Conditions relating to Profit
• Profit has to be known  because it constitutes the  object of contracting, and therefore ignorance about it nullifies the contract.
■  It is impermissible in Mudarabah  to specify the return  for any of the two
parties in terms ofa lump sum amount or a certain percentage ofthe capital, because  such  specification  eliminates  profit  sharing  which  constitutes a fundamental  aspect of the Mudarabah  contract.  By such specification, the very essence of partnership will be lost when, for instance, the profit earned is just equal to the lump sum amount or percentage of the capital earmarked for one party.
• Permissibility of applying the scoring method of profit distribution is based on the fact that the funds of the participants  in the same investment base have all contributed to achievement  of the return  as per their respective amounts  and  periods  of stay in  the  accounts.  The  scoring  method  is the most  equitable method  of accounting  in hand  that  can be used for assigning profit shares commensurate to the amounts  and their periods of stay  in  the  accounts.  However,  entering  into  investment   on  such basis necessitates mutual  relief from  commitments (Mubara'ah) among investors with regard to any part of entitlement  that could not be catered



1008





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

for through  this method. It is a well established principle in Figh literature that much more exemptions can be allowed in partnership-based dealings (Musharakat) than  in  exchange-based  dealings  (Mu'awadah)  and  that division (Qismah)  through  approximation of shares is based on mutual consent.
• Charging  the  Mudarabah   expenses  in  the  way shown in the  Standard takes into  consideration  what  should  be done  by the  Mudarib  for the sake of carrying out his investment  decisions on receipt of the funds, and his commitment to do the work which entails having the bodies required for that purpose. A resolution to this effect has also been issued by the Al Baraka Seminar (4/1).
• Impermissibility  of charging interest  for loans is based  on the fact that such charge constitutes Riha. In this regard the international Islamic Fiqh Academy issued its resolution  No. (10/2) stipulating that "whether  such increment  is charged for postponement of a defaulted debt, or as an in• terest on the loan stipulated  since the time of signing the contract, both increments  are forms of Shari'ah-prohibited Riba.
• Impermissibility of postponing specification  of profit ratios for the two Mudarabah parties until the profit is earned is based on the fact that such postponement leads to Jahalah  (ignorance) which could lead to dispute. On the contrary, agreement between the two parties - at time of distribu• tion - on changing the ratios agreed upon or donating part of the profit is a right that the two parties may permissibly exercise.
• Impermissibility of final distribution of the profit between the stakeholders of the company before deduction  of expenses, allocations and reserves is the Shari'ah principle that no profit is to be sought before preservation  of the capital.
• Permissibility  of distributing the profit on the basis of constructive liq•
uidation  and  after ensuring  the safety of the capital is based  on accep•
tance of valuation  in Shari'ahin several applications  including  Zakah

(4) See the Forth Resolution of the Muslim World League in  its 15  Session, held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, on 21-26/10/1422 A.H.; Resolution No.  30(5/4) of the International Islamic Fiqh Academy; and Fatwa No. (2/8) of the 8 Seminar of the Al Baraka, Fatawa Al Baraka,  (P. 134).



1009





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

as well as theft incidents. In this context, the Prophet  (peace be upon him) is reported to have said:  "When someone liberates a slave he owns with other parties, he should pay partners from his money, and ifhe has no money the slave has to be equitably valuedfor him".  (5
■  The Shari'ah basis for the  ruling that  no profit has to be sought in Mudarabah  before  preservation  of the  capital  is the  Hadith  of the Prophet (peace be upon him) who said:  "A prayer performer is just like a merchant who obtains profit only after preserving his capital. Similarly
a prayer performer cannot get his Nafilah  (voluntary prayer) accepted before he performs Faridah (obligatory prayer)."° This Hadith indicates
that profit sharing is inacceptable before preservation ofthe capital. This is so because profit is an increment which cannot be obtained before obtaining the principal.
■  The Mudarabah contract becomes null and void when the two parties refrain from specifying profit sharing ratios and fail to find any established normal practice of profit sharing  applicable to their  case.  This ruling is based on the fact that ignorance about profit, which constitutes the contracting object, must nullify the contract.
• Profit sharing ratios can be commensurate to shareholding ratios or not, because profit is deserved for contribution of funds, work or guarantee. When any ofthese three aspects is fulfilled there is no Shari'ah prohibition for the partners to specify profit sharing ratios on mutual consent. This viewpoint is adopted in the Hanbali School.
■  The Shari'ah basis for impermissibility of agreement between the two parties on charging the whole loss to one ofthem or using disproportion• ate ratios for loss distribution is the statement ofAli Ibn Abu Talib who is reported to have said: "Profit is to be distributed as per the agreement of

(5) "Sahih Muslim" [2: 1140].
(6) Related by Al-Bayhaqi in "Al-Sunan" quoting Ali Ibn Abu Talib. Al-Bayhaqi mentioned that the chain of transmission  of this Hadith includes a weak narrator:  "Al-Mawsuah AL-Fiqhiyyah" [38: 74].
(7) "AIL-Hidayah Sharh AL-Bidayah" by AI-Mirghinani, [3: 3-8], Al-Maktabah Al-Islamiyyah;
"Bada 'f' AI-Sana'i" by AI-Kasani, [6: 62-63]; and "AL-Mubdi" by Ibn Muslih [5: 4], AI• Maktab Al-Islami, Beirut, 1400 A.H.



1010





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

the two parties, whereas loss should be borne according to the ratios of contribution  to the capital?" A condition which stipulates that the loss of one party should be borne by the other party is invalid because it is oppressive and would lead to reaping ofunlawful gain by one party at the expense of the other.
■  It is permissible  for the two parties to stipulate a condition  that when
profit exceeds certain limit or index the whole additional amount should be taken by one ofthem, because such condition is permissible according to Sharf'ah if it happens to be stipulated.
■  It is impermissible to agree on earmarking the profit of a specific portion ofthe capital for one party and the profit ofthe remaining portion for the other, because such arrangement could jeopardize the process of profit sharing and lead to oppression.
• Permissibility ofagreement between the two parties to change profit sharing ratios at any time, stems from the fact that the two parties are the sole owners ofthe profit, and agreement between them to change its distribution ratios does not entail a Shari'ah-prohibited act, such as discarding away the principle ofprofit sharing."
• Permissibility of agreement on fixed or variable ratios ofprofit distribution is based on the validity of such agreement since it has been the result of mutual consent. The only restriction is that such agreement should observe the Shari'ah ruling that neither of the two parties should be deprived from his share in the profit.
• Regarding constructive  liquidation  a resolution has been issued by the
Islamic Fiqh Academy of Makkah Al-Mukarramah.

(8) Related by lbn Abu Shaybah in his "Musannaf" [4:  268], Maktabat Al-Rushd Press, Riyadh.
(9) See the proceedings of the 10 A Baraka Seminar  - Fatwa No.  (8) and the 4 AL
Baraka Seminar - Fatwa No.  (5). This viewpoint is also supported by a Fatwa issued by the Sharf'ah Board of the Faisal Islamic bank of Sudan (P.  107)  and published in the Manual of Shari'ah Fatawa of the Center of Islamic Economic of the International Islamic Bank, (P. 53).
(10) The 4 Resolution of the  16  Session,  held by the Islamic Fiqh Academy of the Muslim World League. This viewpoint has also been adopted by the 8 Al Baraka Seminar (Fatwa No. 2).



1011





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Deposit (Wadi'ah)

Funds given to someone for safekeeping

Bank Deposit
Funds which  individuals  and institutions  entrust  the bank  to keep, provided that the bank assumes the commitment  to repay such funds or their equivalent to depositors or any other specific person, on demand or subject to the conditions agreed upon.

Demand Deposit (Current Deposit)
Demand deposit is the means whereby a current account is established. The current account can be defined as: The funds deposited by their owners with the bank so as to be ready for withdrawal on need. The bank assumes the responsibility of immediate repayment of such funds on demand, and without any type of prior notification.

Savings Deposit (Savings Account)

Small cash deposits which individuals cut from their incomes and pay to the bank so as to open saving accounts for them. The owners of such accounts have the right to withdraw the whole or part of the balances of their accounts at any time.















1012

























