Shari'ah Standard No. (49)



Unilateral and Bilateral Promise












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                           1163
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................      1164

1. Scope of the Standard..............................................................................      1164
2. Definitions of Unilateral and Bilateral Promises.................................      1164
3. Types of Promises and the Shari'ah Rules Applicable to Them .........      1164
4. Types of Bilateral Promise and the Rules Applicable to Them...........      1166
5. Permissible Applications of Promises and Bilateral Promises............      1168
6. Impermissible Applications.....................................................................      1168
7. Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................      1168
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1169
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1170
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard....................................      1172
Appendix (c):  Definitions.............................................................................      1173























1161








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to explain the concepts ofunilateral promise/under• taking  (promise) and bilateral promise/undertaking (bilateral promise); their various types and the enforceability of each type; the Sharf'ah rules that govern them and the most important  contemporary  applications of each type in the activities oflslamic financial institutions.






























(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



1163





Shar f'ah  Stan dar d N o.  (49): Unila teral  an d Bilateral Promis e





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers promises (unilateral and bilateral) given by certain parties for the purpose of concluding a contract or effecting a disposal, and explains when such instruments  are binding  and when they are not, the jurisprudential rules that govern them, and the most important contemporary  applications  of each type  in  the  activities of Islamic financial institutions.

2. Definitions of Unilateral and Bilateral Promises

2/1  For the purpose ofthis Standard, a unilateral promise is given when a party informs another  of its resolute intention  (undertaking) to act in the future in the interest of the other, with the other having the option to avail itself of the promise. The party undertaking the promise is called the 'promisor', the party receiving the promise is called the 'promisee' (the beneficiary ofthe promise) and the action is called the 'promised action'.

2/2  Bilateral promise in this Standard refers to the exchange oftwo back• to-back promises between two parties, each promising to perform an act in the future relating to the same subject matter.

3. Types of Promises and the Shari'ah Rules Applicable to Them

3/1  Promising to perform an act that impermissible by the Shari'ah is prohibited, and fulfilling such a promise is also prohibited. Examples of such promises are those intended to be a ruse to circumvent the prohibition of interest-bearing (Riha) transactions.

3/2 Any promise in a loan contract that procures benefit for the lender, over and  above the repayment  of the debt, is  prohibited  by the Shari'ah even if the promise is granted in a document separate from the loan contract.



1164





Shar f'ah  Stan dar d N o.  (49): Unila teral  an d Bilateral Promis e

3/3 Any promise in a sale contract made by the buyer or the seller that results in a repurchase contract ('Inah) is prohibited by the Sharf'ah, whether the promise is part of the sale contract or is given prior or subsequent to it, such as purchasing an item on credit and promising to sell it back on spot for a lower price or selling an item on credit and promising to buy it back on spot for a lower price (reverse 'Inah). The same prohibition applies ifthe parties collude with a third party to act as an intermediary in the repurchase.

3/4 It is permissible to promise to perform an action or a financial trans• action and it is then a religious obligation to fulfill it, meaning that breaking a promise without an excuse is a sin. However, a promise is not legally binding except when there is a real need for it to be enforced, such as when the promisor causes the promisee to incur a liability as a result ofthe promise. For example, ifa person instructs a merchant to purchase a specific item and then resolutely promises the merchant that he will buy this item from him. If the merchant purchases the item solely in reliance on the promise, the promisor is legally bound to purchase the item from him, failing which the promisor  is required to indemnify the promisee (merchant/seller) for any actual loss suffered such that if the merchant  is unable to sell the item for a price that covers the cost ofthe item, the promisor is required to make up the difference between the cost of the item and the price obtained by the merchant for it. Actual loss does not include opportunity cost.

3/5  A legally binding promise, as explained in item 3/4 above, is enforceable only against the promisor and is not enforceable against the promisee who has the option either to demand performance from the promisor or to waive it.

3/6  Fulfilling a benevolent promise (such as a promise to make a gift or lend an item) is a religious obligation but is not binding legally, except if the promise is conditional upon the promisee performing an action that causes the promisee to incur a liability, in which case it is legally binding.  For example, if the promisor says to the promisee:  "If you



1165





Shar f'ah  Stan dar d N o.  (49): Unila teral  an d Bilateral Promis e

buy this item from me, I will give you a gift of another specified item", fulfilling such a promise is a religious obligation and is legally binding.

3/7 It is permissible for a party  to promise to enter into a commutative contract in the future and for the promisee to promise the first party to enter into a separate commutative contract with a different  subject matter from that of the first promise. For example, the first party says, "I promise to sell you this item,  and the other party says,  "I promise to lease to you such and such property, neither  of the two promises is legally binding  except if a promisor  causes a promisee  to incur a liability, in which case such promise is binding.  [see item 3/5]

3/8 When  a promise  is made to enter into a contract  in the future, such contract  is not effected automatically. The contract  must be entered into  at the  relevant  time  by the  exchange  of offer  and  acceptance. Where  the  promise  is legally binding,  if the  offer  is made  by the promisee,  the  promisor  is bound  religiously  and  legally to  accept it. And  if the offer  is made  by the promisor,  the promisee  has the option to accept or reject it.

4. Types of Bilateral Promise and the Rules Applicable to Them

4/1  A bilateral promise to perform an act that is prohibited by the Shari'ah is itself prohibited such as a bilateral promise to enter into one or more contracts with the intention to circumvent the prohibition  of interest (Riha);  e.g.,  a bilateral promise  to enter  into  a sale and  repurchase ('Inah) contract and a bilateral promise to enter into a sale and a loan.

4/2  Fulfillin g a bilateral promise to perform an act that is permitted but not binding under the Sharf'ah is a religious obligation on both parties but is not legally binding except in situations where an actual commercial transaction  is not possible without a binding bilateral promise owing either to legal requirements or to general commercial custom, and the objective is not merely to provide financing, such as:

4/2/1   Bilateral promises in international trade conducted  by means of documentary credits.

4/2/2  Bilateral promises in supply agreements.



1166





Shar f'ah  Stan dar d N o.  (49): Unila teral  an d Bilateral Promis e

4/3 The binding bilateral promises referred to in item 4/2 are not future contracts, which means that the promised contract is not effected automatically  upon  the  promised  date.  The  contract  must  be entered into at the relevant time by exchanging notices of offer and acceptance.  Since the bilateral promise is binding on both parties, if any party makes an offer, the other party is religiously and legally bound by it. If one party defaults in fulfilling the promise, the other party  can obtain a court  injunction  requiring  them  to conclude the contract. If it is not possible to conclude the contract and the promisee needs to mitigate his loss by concluding the same contract with a third party but is not able to recover his cost by means of such contract, the defaulting party is liable to indemnify him for actual loss suffered (not to include opportunity cost) if the price obtained under the new contract (with the third party) is lower than price promised by the defaulting party.

4/4 It is permissible for the two parties to enter into a master agreement for future transactions  where each party has the  option whether or not to enter into the future transaction.  If the parties enter into a transaction, then the terms and conditions agreed in the general framework  (master  agreement)  apply.  An agreement  containing a general framework (a master agreement) is a bilateral promise that does not bind any of the parties to enter into those transactions. For example, an institution and a client wishing to enter into Murabahah transactions  can  agree on  a  general  framework  which  explains the transaction  process and the terms  and conditions.  A general framework (a master agreement) is not considered to be a concluded transaction and the client is not required upon signing the framework to enter into a Murabahah contract. Rather, each party has an option. When the parties enter into the Murabahah contract by exchanging notices ofoffer and acceptance, the contract becomes subject to all the terms and conditions agreed upon in the general framework (master agreement) which are expressly reconfirmed and incorporated  in every contract. [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (37) on Credit Agreement]



1167





Shar f'ah  Stan dar d N o.  (49): Unila teral  an d Bilateral Promis e

5. Permissible Applications  of Promises and Bilateral Promises

5/1 The promise  given by the  client in the Murabahah  transactions conducted by institutions is legally binding by virtue of item 3/5 of this Standard. [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (8) on Murabahah]

5/2 The promise given by the institution in Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek transactions to grant the leased asset to the lessee as a gift conditional on that he pays all the lease installments is legally binding as in item
3/6 of this Standard.  [see Shari'ah Standard (9) on Ijarah Muntahia
Bittamleek]

The promise given by the institution  in diminishing  Musharakah transactions  that it will lease its share of the asset to the other co• owner is legally binding and the promise given by the client that he will buy units of the institution's share at stipulated intervals are legally binding by virtue of item 3/5 of this Standard.  [see para 5 of Sharf'ah Standard No. (12) on Sharikah (Musharakah) and Modern Corporations]

6. Impermissible Applications

It is impermissible  to  enter  into back-to-back  bilateral promises  for the purpose  of circumventing  the prohibition  by Shari'ah of certain transactions,  such as back-to-back derivatives as in items 3/1  and 3/7 of this Standard.  [see para 5 of Shari'ah  Standard No.  (20) on Sale of Commodities in Organized Markets]

7. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 21 Safar 1434 A.H., corresponding to 4 January
2013A.D.














1168





Shar f'ah  Stan dar d N o.  (49): Unila teral  an d Bilateral Promis e





Adoption of the Standard


The Sharf'ah Board adopted the Standard on Unilateral and Bilateral Promise in its meeting No. (34), held in the Kingdom ofBahrain, during the period of 20-21 Safar 1434 A.H., corresponding to 3-4 January 2013 A.D.













































1169





Shar f'ah  Stan dar d N o.  (49): Unila teral  an d Bilateral Promis e





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 14 Jumada II, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 7 June 2009 A.D., the General Secretariat decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Unilateral and Bilateral Promise.

In a joint meeting held in the Kingdom ofBahrain, on 18 Safar 1428 A.H., corresponding to 8 March 2007 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards committees (1) and (2) discussed the study, approved it and required the consultant to prepare the exposure draft ofthe Standard.

In a further joint meeting held in Manama, the Kingdom of Bahrain, on
15 Jumada I, 1428 A.H., corresponding to 31 May 2007 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards  Committees  (1)  and  (2)  discussed the draft of the Standard and necessary amendments were made in the light of the discussions and observations ofthe meeting.

In its meeting No. (19) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, during the period of26-30 Sha'ban 1428 A.H., corresponding to 8-12 September 2007
A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the draft ofthis Standard and made the amendments which it deemed necessary.

The General Secretariat held a public hearing in the Kingdom ofBahrain on 8 Jumada II, 1429 A.H., corresponding to 12 June 2008 A.D. The public hearing was attended by a number of representatives from central banks, institutions,  accounting  firms, Shari'ah scholars, academics and  others interested in this field. The members ofthe Sharf'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) duly responded to several comments and observations that were made in the public hearing.

In its meeting No.  (21) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah,  during the period of21-48 Jumada II, 1429 A.H., corresponding to 28 June -2 July



1170





Shar f'ah  Stan dar d N o.  (49): Unila teral  an d Bilateral Promis e

2008 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the amendments proposed by the participants in the public hearing and incorporated the amendments that it considered suitable.

In its meeting No.  (25) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain,  during the period of2-4 Dhul-Qadah 1430 A.H., corresponding to 21-23 October 2009
A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the draft of the Standard, incorporated the necessary amendments that it deemed appropriate, and adopted the Standard.












































1171





Shar f'ah  Stan dar d N o.  (49): Unila teral  an d Bilateral Promis e





Appendix  (B)

The Shari'ah Basis for the standard


The International Islamic Fiqh Academy resolved: "In situations where a sale contract cannot be concluded because the seller does not own the commodity and there is a public interest in obligating both parties to sign a contract in the future by virtue oflaw or otherwise, or according to inter• national norms and customs, as in the case of opening letters of credit for importing goods, bilateral promise can be made binding to the two parties': [Resolution No. (157) 6/17 on Bilateral Promise and Collusion in Contracts (Islamic Fiqh Academy Magazine), Issue No. (17), Vol. 3, (P. 681)]


































1172





Shar f'ah  Stan dar d N o.  (49): Unila teral  an d Bilateral Promis e





Appendix  (C) Definitions


General Framework (Master Agreement)

An agreement  representing  mutual understanding and the exchange of non-binding bilateral promises to enter into transactions.










































1173

























