Shari'ah Standard No. (46)



Al-Wakalah Bi Al-Istithmar
(Investment Agency)












Contents


Subject                                                                                    Page

Preface...................................................................................................      1119
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................      1120

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                             1120
2. Definition of Investment Agency and Its Permissibility                         1120
3. Investment Agency: Integral Parts (Arkan) and Its Key Types              1120
4. Characteristics of Investment Agency...................................................      1121
5. Agency Fee................................................................................................      1121
6. Amount, Term and Profit ofthe Investment........................................      1122
7. Liability of an Investment Agent                                                            1123
8. Rights and Obligations ofthe Contracts Executed by the Agent.......      1123
9. Appointment  of a Sub-Agent..................................................................      1123
10. Restrictions Stipulated in Investment Agency......................................      1123
11. Rules of Investment Agency                                                                   1124
12. Contemporary Applications of Investment Agency.............................      1124
13. Date of Issuance of the Standard.............................................................      1126
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1127
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1128
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard..............................           1130














1117








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to explain the rules of Investment Agency applicable to Islamic financial institutions,co the conditions for its validity, its types, its implications and its contemporary applications.

































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



1119





Sharf' ah  Stan dard  No  (46 ):  AI -Wakal ah  Bi Al -lstithm ar  (Inves tm ent Agency)





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers Investment Agency in various fields, or parts thereof, and the powers and responsibilities of the principal  and the investment agent. It does not cover Agency in general or the acts of Uncommissioned Agent  (Fodooli)  as they  are covered by Sharf'ah  Standard No.  (23)  on Agency and the Acts of an Uncommissioned  Agent (Fodooli).
2. Definition of Investment Agency and Its Permissibility

2/1  Investment  Agency means appointing  another  person  to invest and grow one's wealth, with or without a fee.
2/2 Investment Agency is permissible subject  to the relevant  Shari'ah rules.

3. Investment Agency: Integral Parts (Arkan) and Its Key Types

3/1  The integral parts (Arkan) of a valid investment agency are offer and acceptance, the subject matter ofthe contract, and the two contracting parties (the principal and the agent). [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (23) for the conditions  that are required  for a valid agency and the rules relating to the acts of the uncommissioned agent (Fodooli)]

3/2 It is permissible to make  the  appointment of an  agent contingent agency upon the fulfillm ent of certain conditions  or to cause to take effect on a specified future  date. It is  also permissible  to stipulate conditions/restrictions that are compliant with Shari'ah. For further details, see Shari'ah Standard No.  (23).

3/3  It  is permissible  for the  investment agency  to  be  restricted to a particular kind  of investment,  or a specific place or be subject to other  restrictions. It is also permissible that  it be unrestricted, in which  case it would  still be restricted  by customary practice and that the agent acts in the principal's  best interests.



1120





Sharf' ah  Stan dard  No  (46 ):  AI -Wakal ah  Bi Al -lstithm ar  (Inves tm ent Agency)

3/4  It is not permissible for any one ofthe parties to unilaterally amend the restrictions  in the agency contract.  [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (23) for the types of agency]

4. Characteristics of Investment Agency

4/1  Investment agency contracts, whether remunerated or unremuner• ated, are binding  on institutions  because they are invariably fixed term contracts in which both parties agree not to terminate  within a specified period.

4/2 Where the parties  agreed to terminate  for a specified period, it is permissible for the contract to stipulate the right of one ofthe parties to terminate the contract unilaterally in specific circumstances.

4/3  When the term ofan agency expires, the agent is required not to enter into new investment activities, but may not liquidate ongoing existing investments.

5. Agency Fee

5/1  If the agency is remunerated, the agent's fee should either be a fixed amount or a percentage of the amount invested. It is also permissible to link the fee to an established index/benchmark  that is known to both parties and is referred to before every investment period after the fee of the first period has been determined. It should, however, be capped and floored (by assigning it maximum and minimum limits).

5/2  Ifthe fee was not specified in the contract and the agent customarily charges a fee as is normal practice in institutions then the agent will be entitled to a fee which is prevalent in the relevant markets. This also applies when the agent does not complete the task required after starting and realizing returns that are beneficial to the principal.

5/3  The principal is required to paythe investment agent's fees in accordance with stipulated time and manner.

5/4  It is permissible to stipulate that the agent, in addition to his fee, is entitled to all or part of any amount  over and above the expected profit as a performance  incentive.



1121





Sharf' ah  Stan dard  No  (46 ):  AI -Wakal ah  Bi Al -lstithm ar  (Inves tm ent Agency)

6. Amount,  Term and Profit of the Investment

6/1 The  amount and  term  of the  investment should  be  determined, irrespective of whether the  amount is paid  as a lump  sum  or in installments.

6/2 The principal is responsible  for any expenses related to the invest• ment  such  as transportation, storage, taxes, maintenance and  in• surance. It is not permissible to require the agent to pay them  from the  agent's own  funds,  or to defer any reimbursement due to the agent where he has paid them  on behalf of the principal  or to make such reimbursement subject to the yield of the investment. And the investment agent is liable, as a legal entity, for any expenses related to its employees or equipment.

6/3 The agent may start investment  activity before receiving the funds
(from the principal),  and with the principal's permission, by:

6/3/1  Incurring a debt on behalf of the principal  by purchasing  on credit;

6/3/2 Advancing a loan to the principal by purchasing  something  on his behalf.

6/4 Any loan advanced by the agent is construed  as an interest free loan which may not bring any benefit to the agent as creditor. The agent is entitled to its fee and performance incentive, without  consideration to the loan advanced.

6/5  The profit in its entirety is the right ofthe principal unless it is stipulated that the agent shall be entitled to all or part of any excess above the expected profit as a performance  incentive in addition to its fixed fee.

6/6  It is permissible for the agent, with the principal's consent, to set aside a portion  of the profit to create a profit equalisation reserve for the benefit of the principal.

6/7  Upon  liquidation, the balance  of the profit  equalisation  reserve  is returned  to the principal without affecting the agent's entitlement to the fixed fee or performance incentive  for the period  in which  the reserve was set aside.



1122





Sharf' ah  Stan dard  No  (46 ):  AI -Wakal ah  Bi Al -lstithm ar  (Inves tm ent Agency)

7. Liability of an Investment Agent

7/1  The agent acts in a fiduciary capacity in relation to the investment and therefore is not liable for any loss in cases other than willful misconduct, negligence, or breach  of contract  unless the breach happens to be advantageous to the principal such as selling an asset for a price higher than the price required by the principal. In situations where the agent is held liable for loss ofcapital, such liability is limited to the capital amount and the agent is not liable for loss of expected profit whether the capital was invested immediately or delayed or not invested at all.

7/2 If the investment results in profit or capital gain in case of a breach that  is advantageous  to the principal, then  such profit  or capital increase belongs to the principal without affecting the agent's right to its performance  incentive.

8. Rights and Obligations  of the Contracts Executed by the Agent

The results ofthe contract (like transfer of ownership and entitlement to the fee) belong to the principal. However, the rights and obligations (like pursuit ofpayment  or delivery including litigation) belong to the agent.

9. Appointment of a Sub-Agent

9/1  The investment agent is not permitted to appoint a sub-agent for the prescribed investment activities except for activities outside its area of expertise, or what is normally outside the capacity of the agent or its employees or where the principal grants the agent permission to subcontract.

9/2 The sub-agent appointed by the agent with the consent ofthe principal cannot be dismissed by the agent but can only be dismissed by the principal. However, ifthe principal authorizes the agent to appoint any sub-agent at his will, the agent is entitled to dismiss the sub-agent.

10. Restrictions Stipulated in Investment Agency

10/1 The investment agent must adhere to a restriction requiring it to consult the principal before any investment  and if any breach by the agent results in loss, the agent shall bear it.



1123





Sharf' ah  Stan dard  No  (46 ):  AI -Wakal ah  Bi Al -lstithm ar  (Inves tm ent Agency)

10/2 If the  Investment Agency is restricted  to activities  that  yield a minimum specified profit margin and the agent does not find such an investment, then  it should seek the principals consent before investment.  If it invests in lower-yielding transactions, it is liable to compensate  the principal  for the difference between the profit earned and the average profit prevalent  in the market (if it is less than the stipulated amount/percentage). It is not liable for the minimum profit margin specified for the investment by the principal. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (23) on Agency and the Acts of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli), item 6/3/2]

11. Rules of Investment  Agency

If the agent co-mingles  his own funds with the principal's  funds or with the funds that he manages, he may not then purchase, for his own account  any assets from the  assets owned by the co-mingled  funds without giving notice on each occasion. This is to establish the transfer of ownership and liability for the asset from the co-mingled funds to the agent's account. This requirement is impracticable  in relation to investment  accounts (and therefore this requirement  may be waived). [see items 7/1/2 and 7/1/3]

See also Shari'ah Standard No. (23) on Agency and the Acts of an Un•
commissioned Agent (Fodooli).

12. Contemporary  Applications  of Investment Agency

12/1  Co-mingling the funds ofan unrestricted agency with Mudarabah funds or with the agent's funds.

12/1/1  It is permissible to co-mingle funds on the basis ofInvestment Agency with funds from Mudarabah  investment accounts. Such funds are treated as if they were extra funds provided by a capital provider in a Mudarabah investment or shareholder funds when they are co-mingled with funds in Mudarabah investment  accounts.  Allocation  of profits  is  calculated by the standard prorated  method  (usually daily weighted



1124





Sharf'ah Standard No (46): AI-Wakalah Bi Al-lstithmar (Investment Agency)

average method)  for funds invested in Mudarabah which takes into account  each investor's amount  and the tenor of the  investment.  All the profits  of the  invested  funds in Murabahah  belong to the principals  and the  agent is entitled to his fee and any performance incentive stipulated The agent is not entitled to any profits generated from the Mudarabah accounts he invested.

12/2  Investment agency for the financing ofworking capital Investment  agency can be used as a substitute for an overdraft. The amount provided to the client is regarded as the institution's
undivided share in the working capital ofthe client. It is permissible
for the client to use the withdrawn  amount  to settle the client's liabilities relating to his activities or his employees' salaries. The client is entitled to a fee for his service and profit from his portion ofthe working capital and losses occurring after the agency, if any, are borne by both parties on a pro-rata basis. If the client has any interest-bearing deposits or loans, the institution should stipulate that the client is solely responsible for them.
When  the client does not require financing  anymore, then  the relationship may be terminated on the basis of Takharuj  which means that either the joint account is distributed  between them pro-rata or one party will purchase the share ofthe other at a price agreed upon at that time.

12/3  Appointing conventional banksbythe institutions as their investment agents and vice versa

12/3/1 It is permissible for institutions to appoint a conventional bank as an investment agent, provided that the relevant con• tracts are compliant with Sharf'ah approved by the institu• tion's Shari'ah Supervisory Board, and that the conventional banks have among their activities Shari'ah-compliant modes offinancing and investment with proper Shari'ah supervision

(2) As an alternative to an overdraft, its application requires precise accounting treatment



1125





Sharf' ah  Stan dard  No  (46 ):  AI -Wakal ah  Bi Al -lstithm ar  (Inves tm ent Agency)

and Shari'ah audit without violating the requirements of the regulatory authorities.

12/3/2  It is permissible for the institution to accept funds based on Wakalah from conventional banks and invest them in its ac• tivities which have been approved by its Sharf'ah Supervisory Board, provided that the contract is free from conditions and restrictions that are prohibited by the Shari'ah.

12/4 Expiry of the investment agency term before collecting amounts receivable
If the agency expires and the receivables are yet to be collected, and the agency is not mutually renewed, the investment agent is required to collect the receivables and take necessary actions against the debtors or other counter-parties delaying their payments.
The agent is not entitled to any fee for such collection unless agreed otherwise. It is not permissible for the agent to use such funds received for his personal use or to re-invest them. The agent is not required to pay to the principal such receivables from his own personal funds, or to seek financing like Tawarruq for this purpose.

12/5 In the event of early termination  of the agency either by mutual agreement, or by one party  unilaterally exercising its right to terminate  or by early settlement of the amounts due (from the obligors), it is permissible (if mutually agreed upon) to reduce the performance  incentive stipulated for the agent, if any, in proportion to the tenor of the investment.

13. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 26 Jumada II, 1432 A.H., corresponding to
29 May2011 A.D.











1126





Sharf' ah  Stan dard  No  (46 ):  AI -Wakal ah  Bi Al -lstithm ar  (Inves tm ent Agency)





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted this  Standard in its 30th meeting held in the Kingdom of Bahrain during the period of 24-26 Jumada II, 1432 A.H., corresponding to 27-29 May 2011 A.D.












































1127





Sharf' ah  Stan dard  No  (46 ):  AI -Wakal ah  Bi Al -lstithm ar  (Inves tm ent Agency)





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 23 Muharram  1430 A.H., corresponding to 20 January 2009 A.D., the General Secretariat decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Investment Agency.

In its meeting held in Kuwait, on 6 Rabi' I, 1431 A.H., corresponding to
20 February 2010 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards  Committee discussed the draft of a Shari'ah Standard on Investment Agency and made necessary amendments.
The revised draft of the Shari'ah Standard was presented to the Sharf'ah Board in its 28th meeting held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, during the period of 12-14 Dhul-Qa'dah 1431 A.H., corresponding to 20-22 October
2010 A.D. The amendments that were deemed appropriate were included

The revised draft of the Sharf'ah Standard was presented to the Shari'ah Board in its 29th meeting held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, during the period of 28-30 Rabi' I, 1432 A.H., corresponding to 3-5 March 2010 A.D. The amendments that were deemed appropriate were included.

The General Secretariat held a public hearing in the Kingdom ofBahrain, on 25 Jumada II, 1432 A.H., corresponding to 28 May 2011 A.D. All the comments made in the public hearing were listened to, and a representative ofthe Shari'ah Board answered these comments and made commentary on them.

In its meeting No. (30) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, during the period of 24-26 Jumada II, 1432 A.H., corresponding to 27-29 May 2011
A.D.,  the  Shari'ah  Board discussed the  amendments  proposed  by the
participants in the public hearing and incorporated the amendments that it deemed appropriate, and adopted the Standard.



1128





Sharf' ah  Stan dard  No  (46 ):  AI -Wakal ah  Bi Al -lstithm ar  (Inves tm ent Agency)

In its meeting held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah, on 30 Sha'ban 1436
A.H., corresponding to 17 June 2015 A.D., the Sharf'ah Standards Review Committee  reviewed this  Standard.  After  deliberation, the  committee approved necessary amendments, and the Standard was adopted  in its current amended version.

















































1129





Sharf'ah Standard No (46): AI-Wakalah Bi Al-lstithmar (Investment Agency)





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


The basis for the differentiating between investment agency and agency in general is that the former is in order to increase wealth, and it is similar to Mudarabah and Musharakah in this respect However, the difference between investment  agency and Mudarabah  and Musharakah  is that Investment Agency is a form of ljarah  (hiring), while Mudarabah  and Musharakah are forms of partnership.  As for the general agency,  it is an authorization to perform specific tasks such as payment etc. Even if the authorization  is to engage in a sale/purchase, such as the authorization of the client in a Murabahah  contract, its main purpose  is to acquire ownership for the institution rather than investment on its behalf.
■  The basis for the  permissibility  of investment  agency is the  Hadith
stating:  "Engage in trade with the wealth of orphans so that it will not be consumed by Zakah" as well as numerous Verses of the Qur'an on seeking sustenance, striving and earning.
• The basis for the binding nature of the investment agency is that it is entered into for a specific period; i.e., there is an agreement between the counterparties that neither ofthem can unilaterally dissolve the contract except in certain circumstances specified in the contract.
■  The basis for allocating for the investment agent any profit amount in excess of the expected profit is that it is a type of conditional gift and is an incentive.
• Ifthe agency contract stipulates a certain percentage ofprofit and the agent invests in lower-yielding transactions,  the agent is liable to compensate the principal for the difference between the profit earned and the average

(3) Related by Al-Tabrani  in  i\l-Awsat" and graded  authentic  (sahih)  by AI-'Iraqi. Ibn Hajar graded it as good (hasan).  "Fayd AI-Qadir" [1: 108]. It is found in "Al-Muwatta"" as a statement ofUmar (may Allah be pleased with him).



1130





Sharf'ah Standard No (46): AI-Wakalah Bi Al-lstithmar (Investment Agency)

profit prevalent in the market (if it is less than the stipulated amount/ percentage), because he is in breach of the conditions  of the Agency. However, the agent is not liable for the specified percentage stipulated in the contract ifit is higher than the prevalent market rate, because it will be tantamount to acquiring another's wealth by illegitimate means.
• The basis for the permissibility of employing the agency's funds in the Mudarabah portfolio is that the authorization granted by the investment agency includes such employment when the agency is unrestricted.
■  The basis for the principle that the agent, in a situation where the agency's
funds are employed in a Mudarabah portfolio, is entitled to the agency commission and not to Mudarabah  profit is that his contract with the institution is that of agency and not of Mudarabah. Even if the agent has employed the funds in a Mudarabah portfolio, the profit entitled to the institution  is generated from the Mudarabah  portfolio and not on the basis of agency.





























(4) See "AL-Mughni", vol. 5, (P. 135).



1131























