Shari'ah Standard No. (54)



Revocation of Contracts by
Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface...................................................................................................      1249
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................      1250

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                             1250
2. Definition ofCooling-Off Options to Revoke......................................      1250
3. Form of Cooling-Off Options to Revoke                                                1250
4. Permissibility of Cooling-Off options to Revoke.................................      1250
5. Causes Triggering Revocation Rights....................................................      1250
6. Conditions ofValid Revocation..............................................................      1251
7. Impediments  to Revocation....................................................................      1251
8. Consequences ofRevocation..................................................................      1251
9. Waiver ofRevocation Rights...................................................................      1251
10. Payment for Waiver ofRevocation Rights.............................................      1252
11. Application of Cooling-Off Options to Revoke....................................      1252
12. Date of Issuance ofthe Standard.............................................................      1253
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1254
Appendices                                                                                             . Appendix (a):  BriefHistory ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1255
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard....................................       1257
















1247








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to define contract revocation and in particular, revo• cation by exercise of a cooling-off option (Khiyar al-Shart), to distinguish it from other types of contract termination that resemble it, to explain its causes and conditions, impediments to it and its application in the activities of Islamic financial institutions.






























(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



1249





Sharf'ah Standard No. (54): Revocation  of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers the stipulation of revocation of valid and binding contracts and the causes and consequences of and impediments to such revocation. It does not cover the expiry of contracts at the end of their contractual terms or nullification owing to the absence of a condition required by the Shari'ah.

2. Definition  of Cooling-Off Options to Revoke

Revocation by exercise of a cooling-off option refers to the termination of a valid and binding contract by virtue of a stipulation in the contract giving one ofthe parties the option to revoke the contract.

3. Form of Cooling-Off Options to Revoke

A cooling-off option to revoke can be stipulated in the contract in any form that indicates it, and it is not required to use any specific word with the meaning of revocation.

4. Permissibility of Cooling-Off Options to Revoke

4/1 It is permissible for both parties to stipulate an option for one or both of them to revoke the contract in specific situations agreed in the contract, without violating Sharf'ah rules.

4/2 Revocation by exercise of a cooling-off option is valid if its causes exist, its conditions are satisfied and there are no impediments. It is invalid ifits causes do not exist, any of its conditions is not satisfied, if there is an impediment or it is contrary to Shari'ah.

5. Causes Triggering Revocation Rights

The cause that triggers the cooling-off option is the existence of one of the situations stipulated in the contract, the occurrence of which gives one or both parties a conditional right to revoke.



1250





Sharf'ah Standard No. (54): Revocation  of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option

6. Conditions  of Valid Revocation

The following conditions must be fulfilled for revocation to be valid:

6/1  Existence of the cause triggering the option to revoke at the time of the revocation.

6/2 Absence of any impediments.

6/3 Notification of the revocation given by the owner of the cooling-off option to the other party according to the requirements  of custom.

6/4 Exercise of the cooling-off option  to revoke by the owner of the option.

7. Impediments  to Revocation

Revocation cannot take place in the following situations:

7I1  Destruction ofthe sale item caused by a natural disaster after delivery.

7/2 Destruction  of the sale item caused by the buyer whether before or after delivery.

7/3 Conduct that transfers ownership and creates rights for third parties, such as selling or gifting the sale item resulting in ownership passing to a third party.

7I4 Expiry of the period  specified in the contract  for exercise of the cooling-off option.

8. Consequences of Revocation

Revocation  nullifies the  contract  at the  moment  of revocation. Any growth in the sale item that is physically attached to it is considered part of it. Any growth in the sale item that is physically separate from it and occurs between the time ofcontract and revocation and before the buyer takes delivery belongs to the seller. If it occurs after deliver, it belongs to the buyer.

9. Waiver of Revocation Rights

If the owner of a cooling-off option chooses not to exercise his right to revoke and there is no specific recurring harm attributable to the cause



1251





Sharf'ah Standard No. (54): Revocation  of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option

triggering  the option,  the buyer  is deemed  to have permanently waived the option. If the harm  attributable to the cause triggering the option  is recurring or continuous, the option is not waived. For example, if a leased asset breaks down and the buyer chooses not to revoke the contract  and repairs the asset and then  the asset breaks  down again, the buyer is still entitled  to exercise his option to revoke.

1 O. Payment for Waiver of Revocation Rights

10/1  It is not permissible  to  stipulate payment  for waiver of revocation rights in a sale contract.  In contracts that  run  for specified terms, such as leases (ljarah), Istisna'a, debt transfer  (Hawalat al-Dayn), share cropping (Muzara'ah), tree planting partnership  (Mugharasah) and  agency (Wakalah), it is permissible  for one of the parties  to waive their rights to the remaining period of the contract in return
for a consideration  agreed at the time of waiver.

10/2 Unforeseen  circumstances resulting  in non-exercise  of a right to revoke are excluded from the above rule.
11. Application of Cooling-Off Options to Revoke

11/1  Cooling-off options  to revoke may be stipulated  in credit facility agreements  to be triggered by events of default relating to solven• cy, potential  insolvency  before it occurs or breach  of a restrictive covenant  in the contract.

11/2  If the lessor stipulates in a lease contract  that he is entitled to add a supplementary rental amount at the beginning of each lease peri• od to cover the costs of maintenance, insurance and taxes levied on owners, and the lessee refuses to accept that, the lessor is entitled to revoke the contract.  If the lessee has given a prior  promise  to purchase  the leased asset, the lessor can exercise his rights under the promise  and  demand  performance from  the lessee provided that the supplementary rent for that lease period  is not added  to the purchase price.

11/3  A creditor is entitled to stipulate the right, after notifying the debtor, to accelerate all installments and the right to revoke the contract or



1252





Sharf'ah Standard No. (54): Revocation  of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option

one of them  in the event that the debtor fails to pay two or more instalments despite being solvent.
11/4  If the seller stipulates that the buyer provides security or surety or any other form of guarantee  and the buyer fails to provide it, the seller is entitled to revoke the contract.

11/5  For other situations ofrevocation that apply in options to reconsider, options to revoke for incomplete performance  and options to revoke for breach of trust, see the relevant Shari'ah Standards.

12. Date of Issuance of the Standard

The Sharf'ah  Board issued this standard  on  15  Muharram   1435  A.H., corresponding  to 8 November 2014 AD.





































1253





Sharf'ah Standard No. (54): Revocation  of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option





Adoption of the Standard


The Sharf'ah Board adopted the standard on Revocation of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option in its meeting No.  (39) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 13-15 Muharram 1435 A.H., corresponding to 6-8
November 2014 A.D,











































1254





Sharf'ah Standard No. (54): Revocation  of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 1 Sha'ban 1431 A.H.,corresponding to 13 July 2010 A.D. the Secretariat of AAOIFI decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Revocation of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option.

In its meeting held on 9May 2012 A.D., the Sharf'ah Standards Committee discussed the study and the exposure draft of the standard  and introduced the changes it deemed suitable in the light ofthe comments and observations of the members.

In its meeting No. (34) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 20-21 Safar 1434
A.H., corresponding to 3-4 January 2013 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the  exposure draft of the standard, and introduced  the changes it deemed suitable.

In  its meeting  No.  (35) held  in  Al-Madinah   Al-Munwwarah on  22•
23 Shawwal  1434  A.H.,  corresponding to  29-30  September  2013  A.D., the Sharf'ah Board continued  its discussions  on the exposure  draft of the standard, and introduced the changes it deemed suitable.

In its meeting No. (37) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain on 19-21 Jumada I, 1435 A.H., corresponding to 20-22 March 2013 A.D., the Shari'ah Board continued   its  discussions   on  the  exposure   draft  of the  standard,  and introduced the changes it deemed suitable.

The  Secretariat  of AAOIFI held  a public  hearing  in  the  Kingdom  of Bahrain on 6 Jumada II, 1434 A.H., corresponding to 16 April 2013 A.D. The public hearing was attended by representatives of central banks, institutions, auditing firms, Shari'ah scholars, academics and others interested in this field The members  of the Sharf'ah Board and the Shari'ah Standards  Committee responded to a number  of observations raised by the participants.



1255





Sharf'ah Standard No. (54): Revocation  of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option

In its meeting No. (38) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 28 Sha'ban •
1 Ramadan 1435 A.H., corresponding to 26-28 June 2014 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the changes proposed at the public hearing, and introduced the changes it deemed suitable to the exposure draft of the standard, and adopted the standard.

In its meeting No. (39) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain on 13-15 Muharram
1435 A.H., corresponding to 6-8 November  2014 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the exposure draft of the standard and introduced the changes it deemed suitable, and adopted the standard.











































1256





Sharf'ah Standard No. (54): Revoca tion of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


• Stipulation of cooling-off options apply only to binding  contracts be• cause nonbinding contracts are by their nature revocable by one or both parties.
■  The validity of revocation by any form of language, that indicates it, is
based on the general Shari'ah maxim: "Contracts are interpreted accor• ding to intent and inherent meaning of the parties and not by the words or forms used" (Maxims of Al-Majallah Al-i\dliyyah) and the statement of some jurists that the use of the technical word "Revocation" is desi• gnated by jurists and what is important is its meaning.
■  The existence of the cause triggering the option to revoke is required because revocation is contrary to the norm and rule that contracts are generally binding and that in principle consequences must flow necessarily from their causes, and that the cause must exist at the time ofrevocation.
■  The requirement that the other party be notified ofrevocation is based on the opinion ofAbu Hanifah and Muhammad Ibn Al-Hasan, contraryto the opinion of the majority of jurists, because notification averts harm from the other party who, unaware of the revocation, may conduct themselves to their detriment.
■  The four impediments to the exercise of cooling-off options are based variously on the following rationale: (I) Revocation would contradict the basic elements ofthe contract which have been validly established; or (II) revocation would contradict consent implied by conduct (implied terms have the same legal effect as express ones); or (III) revocation is impossible because the term ofthe contract has expired; or (IV) the subject matter of the option to revoke is deemed by law to have ceased to exist.

(2) "Sharh Al-Minhaj Wa Hashiyat Al-Qalyubr" [2: 195]
(3) "AI-Furuq" by Al-Qaraf [3: 269] and "AI-Qalyubr" [2: 189]



1257





Sharf'ah Standard No. (54): Revocation  of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option

■  The basis for the ruling on the effect of revocation and that revocation nullifies the  contract  immediately,  is the  prevailing viewpoint  of the Shafi'i  and Hanbali  schools.  Revocation  invalidates  ownership  in sale contracts. This ruling holds true for the asset sold (subject-matter of the contract), whereas increments  in the asset sold (separate growth) from time of contracting until revocation and before delivery to buyer, belong to the seller who becomes the owner at orjust prior to time ofrevocation. When the buyer takes possession of the asset sold, any separate growth belongs to him.
■  The basis for the rulings stated in item 9 regarding waiver of revocation
right is the viewpoint which Al-Zarkashi has indicated in his book titled
"AL-Manthur Fi Al-Qawa'id".(5
■  The basis for impermissibility of stipulating compensation in the contract as a condition for waiver of revocation right, is based on analogy to Iqa• lah, which is considered as one form of contract revocation and has to be performed without any increase or decrease in considerations. Similarly, Shari'ah prohibits waiver ofsome rights (such as pre-emption  and demar• cation rights) against compensation.
■  The basis for permissibility of stipulating, in the contract, compensation
for waiver of the remaining periods of revocation right, in case of conti• nuous contracts such as leasing, is the fact that the party who waives his right owns a benefit that makes him entitled to remuneration.
■  The basis for applications ofconditional revocation is the rulings indicated in the Sharf'ah standard that relates to each application, because rulings on these applications are derived from these preceding standards.












(4) "Ibn Abidin" [4:  108]  and  "Nihayat AL-Muhtaj" [3: 434] (5) "AI-Manthur Fi AI-Qawa'id" [2: 151]



1258









SABB <I est.
-
Islamic Financial Services



Overview: Publication  Sponsor
Islamic Financial Services in SABB Bank


Banks have become very important for all people and businesses all over the world. They are the backbone ofany financial or economic system at both the local and international levels. Due to their importance, banks are highly regulated by most countries. This is because the country's economy depends totally on the activities of its banks. The stronger and more effective the banks are, the more likely it is that the economic and financial systems may be more stable and effective. All this explains why the countries normally pay much attention to monitoring  and regulating systems for their banks and financial institutions as a means to maintain and increase the efficiency of their banking and financial operations.

The increasing number of economic and financial activities and trans• actions in the world in general and in the Islamic community in particular highlights the need for more Islamic banking services. This is why the Islamic banks, in a highly competing market, do their best to provide their custom• ers with high-quality Islamic banking services that help them manage their financial transactions in a Shariah-compliant way.

The Saudi British Bank (SABB) is one of the banks that  offer such Islamic  banking  services.  In  2001, the  Bank  opened  a new  section, Amanah, to  provide  services  and  products   compatible  with  Shariah standards under the supervision of an independent Shariah Committee. In 2012, the name ofthis section has been changed to "Islamic Financial Services"?



1259




Overview: Publication Sponsor
Islamic Financial Services in SABB Bank

SABB has a network  consisting  of 102 branches  including  18  ladies' section branches. All SABB branches provide Islamic financial services. The bank provides Islamic financial services and solutions as well as treasury services for both personal and corporate customers.
For Personal Customers:
1. Personal finance based on the concept ofTawarruq and Murabahah

a) Tawarruq product (MAL)
MAL is a personal financing product based on Tawarruq. It is one of the sales types compatible with Shariah principles and approved by SABB Shari'ah Committee  whereby the bank owns the metal purchased  from the international metal market  and then  sells it to the customer  at a fixed profit margin and the value thereof is payable over a maximum period of 5 years.

b) Murabahah product (SAHAM)
SAHAMis personal finance product based on Murabaha. It is one of the sales types compatible with Shariah principles and approved by Shariah Committee at SABB whereby the bank purchases Shariah compatible local shares from the Tadawul and then sells it to the customer at a fixed profit margin and the value thereof is payable over a maximum period of 5 years.

2. Real estate finance

Real Estate Finance is based on the concept ofljarah with the promise to transfer ownership. It is a Shariah-compliant transaction whereby SABB purchases the house and then leases it to the customer with the promise to transfer ownership at monthly installment and finance period up to 25 years.

For Personal and Corporate Customers:
1. Murabahah commodity investment account:

Murabahah Commodity Investment Account is an alternative product for conventional fixed deposits product and it is an investment vehicle for customers wishing to gain attractive returns at low risks in short and medium terms.



1260




Overview: Publication Sponsor
Islamic Financial Services in SABB Bank

For Corporate Customers:
I. Islamic cash line

Islamic Cash Line is a product  approved by Shariah Committee  at the Bank  as the  first alternative  solution  to the  conventional  overdraft. The product  is structured  by combining:

a) Murabahah liquidity/Tawarruq. b) Mudarabah  investment  account.
2. Tawarruq

Tawarruq product provides companies with Shariah-compliant solutions for satisfying liquidity requirements  for working capital or expansion projects. The product  concept is based on the customer's purchase  of metals owned by the bank on deferred payment including agreed profit margin. Upon ownership ofthe metals, the customer can authorizes SABB TSY to sell the goods on his behalf and receive the proceeds accordingly.

3. Import documentary credits

Import   Documentary  Credit  is  a  Shariah-compliant  product   based on Murabahah  concept, i.e., selling at cost price plus profit. The bank, upon the customer's request, opens a D/C and purchases the goods from origin. Upon the bank's taking constructive  possession of the goods as per documents  ( arrival of documents)  or physical possession (arrival of goods), it sells the goods to the customer  at cost price plus profit.

Treasury Services Include:

1. Islamic rate hedge against fluctuation  of finance cost

Hedging against fluctuations  of finance is a treasury tool used to limit or minimize the  effects  of interest  rate/profit margin fluctuation, allowing companies to manage their floating rates obligations against fixed rate through  SABB Hedge SWAP.

2. Promise to exchange

Promise to Exchange is an alternative Islamic solution to conventional options, which provides protection against the risk of adverse exchange



1261




Overview: Publication Sponsor
Islamic Financial Services in SABB Bank

rates movements in the future and allows the customer to make use of such movements.

To ensure their compliance with Shariah standards, all newly developed or proposed Islamic products  are presented first to Shariah Committee. IFS department gathers and classifies all issues that the bank, its customers or employees seeks Shariah opinion thereon.
In addition  to arranging  the procedures  for adopting  Islamic products, IFS also  monitors/supervises  the  practical  application  of products   and ensure actual compliance with the Shariah resolutions and regulations   by conducting periodic visits to the various departments of the bank that offer Islamic financial products.

The visit reports are then submitted periodically to the Shariah Committee for obtaining its directions and recommendations on the reported issues.



































1262








I                                                      I
SHARI'AH
STANDARDS








58om





SHARI' AH
STANDARDS


The volume of Shari'ah Standards has become the most prominent compilation  of contemporary Fiqh  reasoning  in the area of Fiqh al-Mua'amalt (Jurisprudence of Financial Transactions) around the globe. The  standards  cover  a   large  array  of Islamic  financial contracts and products, including those pertaining  to  banking, Islamic insurance, investment banking, capital, markets, financing, and so on.

These standards are widely popular  in the global Islamic finance industry, and are deemed the most outstanding Shari'ah reference for that industry, including  legislative bodies, regulatory authorities, and financial institutions, and other professional entities such as law firms, accounting and consultancy firms, in addition to universities, academic institutions and research centers and Fatwa issuing bodies.

Currently, AAOIFI standards are officially adopted by a number of central banks and financial authorities on a  mandatory basis or as guidance. Hence, these standards are rightfully a major hallmark for the Islamic finance industry and one its principal accomplishments.






Sponsored By

SABB Oest..
