Shari'ah Standard No. (51)



Options to Revoke Contracts
Due to Incomplete Performance












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface...................................................................................................      1201
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................      1202

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                             1202
2. Option to Revoke Due to Defect............................................................      1202
3. Option to Revoke Owing to Deal Fragmentation                                    1204
4. Option to Revoke Due to Breach of Description                                    1205
5. Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................      1206
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1207
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1208
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard....................................      1210




























1199








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to explain the situations in which buyers have the option to revoke contracts due to reasons ofdefect, deal fragmentation and breach of description and how such options are exercised in the activities of Institutions.































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



1201





Shari'ah Standard No. (51): Options to Revoke Contracts Due to Incomplete Performance





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers options to revoke contracts  due to reasons of defect, deal fragmentation and breach  of description. It does not cover options to revoke arising from breach  of trust  (dishonest inducement, deception and overcharging)  or options  of due diligence (cooling-off options,  and options  to revoke  due to non-payment) as they have separate  Shari'ah standards dedicated  to them.
2. Option to Revoke Due to Defect

2/1  Definition

It is the  option  of a buyer  to revoke  or continue  with  the  contract arising  from  a hidden  defect  that  the  buyer  did  not  notice  at the time of contract.
2/2 Conditions applicable to options to revoke due to defect

An option to revoke due to defect is subject to the following conditions:

2/2/1 Appearance of a material defect in the  subject matter  of the contract

A material  defect is a defect that  renders the  item defective according to custom, makes it unfit for purpose or diminishes its value.

2/2/2 The defective item being incapable of repair except by incurring cost

2/2/3 The buyer  being  unaware  of the hidden  defect at the time  of contract,  irrespective  of the seller's awareness  of the defect at the time of the contract.

2/2/4 The contract not containing a clause excluding  the seller's li•
ability for defect  (Bay' al-Bara 'ah- sale on the basis  of as is



1202





Shari'ah Standard No. (51): Options to Revoke Contracts Due to Incomplete Performance

where is). It is prohibited for the seller to exclude liability due to defect in Ijarah and lstisna'a contracts.

2/2/5 The hidden defect not being caused by the buyer.

2/3  Scope of the option to revoke due to defect

Options to revoke due to defect exist in commutative financial con• tracts such as sales, money exchange, division ofwealth, settlement of debt by payment  in kind and gift conditional  upon receipt of consideration  (Hibat al-Thawab).

2/4 Time limit

Defective items should be returned,  after taking  delivery of the object of sale and discovering the defect therein, within the period of time customarily allowed for revocation on such grounds.

2/5 Consequences of options to revoke due to defect

The buyer has the option either to revoke the contract and return the item or continue with the contract. Ifthe buyer chooses to return the item after taking delivery, revocation is effected by mutual consent or court order. If the buyer has not taken delivery, and he has been aware ofthe defect before taking delivery, he can unilaterally revoke the  contract  by giving notice  to the  seller and  is entitled upon revocation to a refund ofthe whole price by mutual consent or court order.

2/6 Conditions  applicable to the return of sold items

Return of the item is subject to the following conditions:

2/6/1 Return  of the  item  not  resulting  in  the  fragmentation  of a package deal to which the seller does not consent. And the buyer  shall be entitled  to compensation  against inferiority due to the defect (Arsh).

2/6/2 The item not being damaged or destroyed in the possession of the  buyer,  in  which  case the  buyer  is entitled  only to compensation for the defect and is not entitled to return the item unless the seller accepts return of the damaged item.



1203





Shari'ah Standard No. (51): Options to Revoke Contracts Due to Incomplete Performance

2/6/3 There being nothing  added to the item attached to it but did not grow out of it, which necessities a price rebate,  such as the erection of a building on land. Return of the item is not prevented, ifthe addition to the item is physically connected to it and grows out of it; or is physically separate from it whether it grows out of it, such as dividends on shares and rent from leased assets, or does not grow out of it.

2/6/4 In cases where return due to the defect is impossible (impracti• cal), the buyer shall be entitled to compensation against inferi• ority caused by the defect.

2/7 Impediments preventing the return of sold items

The option to return the sold item is impeded by the non-fulfilment of any of the conditions provided in item 2/2.

2/8 Abating (of the option)

The option to revoke due to defect ceases (abates) in the following situations:

2/8/1  Ifthe defect ceases before the buyer returns the item or payment ofArsh (compensation against inferiority due to the defect).

2/8/2 If the buyer expressly waives his option to revoke.

2/8/3 If the buyer expressly accepts the defective item.

2/8/4  Ifthe buyer's conduct implicitly indicates that he has accepted the defective item, such as continuing to use the item, delaying return of the defective item longer than is customarily acceptable and without an excuse, exploiting or benefitting from the defective item or transferring ownership of the item after discovering the defect.

2/8/5 If the defective item is destroyed by the buyer.

3. Option to Revoke Owing to Deal Fragmentation

3/1  Definition

The option to revoke a contract owing to deal fragmentation  is the option  of the buyer to revoke a contract  (a package deal) that no



1204





Shari'ah Standard No. (51): Options to Revoke Contracts Due to Incomplete Performance

longer includes everything that was contracted  for, resulting in the package deal becoming fragmented.

3/2 Conditions applicable to the option to revoke owing to deal frag•
mentation

The option to revoke a contract owing to deal fragmentation is subject to the buyer not knowing that the deal would become fragmented.

3/3 Types of deal fragmentation in which the option to revoke is granted

3/3/1 When a person sells his own property along with the property of another person in one package without the consent of the other person or when a partner  sells the partnership property in one package without the consent of the other partner.

3/3/2 When it transpires that part of the sold item(s) is the property of a third party.

3/3/3 When  part  of the  sold item(s)  is destroyed  before delivery
(actual or constructive).

3/3/4 When  part  of the  sold item(s)  in a Salam  contract  is not available on the delivery date. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (10) on Salam, item 5/8]

3/4 Prerequisites

Deal fragmentation  entitles the buyer either to revoke the contract or accept what remains of the deal and pay the portion  of the price corresponding to it. The buyer is not entitled to any compensation unless there is a defect in what remains ofthe sold item(s).

4. Option to Revoke Due to Breach of Description

4/1  Definition

The option to revoke due to breach ofdescription is the option ofa buy• er to revoke the contract if the sold item does not meet a condition stipulated in the contract, explicitly or implicitly, such as a car having a specific color.



1205





Shari'ah Standard No. (51): Options to Revoke Contracts Due to Incomplete Performance

4/2 Requirements ofvalid descriptions

4/2/1  The description  must be permissible by the Shari'ah.

4/2/2 The  description   must  be  specific  and  free  from  ambiguity
(Gharar).

4/2/3 The description  must relate to the purpose  of the buyer or be the basis of an increase  in price  or of greater  quality  in the item, such as a requirement that a car be automatic.

4/2/4 The breach of description  must occur at or before the time of delivery (actual or constructive)  and must not be a subsequent occurrence.

4/3 Consequences of the option to revoke for breach of description

4/3/1  Ifthe item fails to correspond to the minim um requirements  of a description, the buyer is entitled to return the item or accept it for its full price without any entitlement  to compensation.

4/3/2 If it is not  possible  to return  the  item,  the buyer  is entitled to a partial  refund  for the breach of description equal to the difference in price between an item that fulfills the description and one that does not.
4/4 Timing and cessation of options to revoke due to breach of description

The option to revoke for breach ofdescription, like the option to revoke for defect, is granted immediately subject to custom and ceases in the circumstances in which the option to revoke due to defect ceases.  [see item 2/7]
4/5 Transfer

The option to revoke for breach of description can transfer to all types of successors and assignees.
5. Date of Issuance of the Standard

The Shari'ah  Board  issued this standard  on 21  Safar1434  A.H., corre•
sponding to 4 January 2013 A.D.



1206





Shari'ah Standard No. (51): Options to Revoke Contracts Due to Incomplete Performance





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted the standard on Options to Revoke Con• tracts Due to Incomplete Performance in its meeting No. (34) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 20-21  Safar  1434  A.H., corresponding  to 3-4
January 2013 A.D.











































1207





Shari'ah Standard No. (51): Options to Revoke Contracts Due to Incomplete Performance





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 14 Rabi' II,  1429 A.H., corresponding to 20 April 2008 A.D., the Secretariat of AAOIFI decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Options to Revoke Contracts Due to Incomplete Performance.

In its meeting held on 29 Jumada II,  1431  A.H., corresponding to 12
June 2010 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee, discussed the study and approved it and assigned to the Shari'ah researcher the preparation of the exposure draft of the standard.

In its meeting held in Dubai (United Arab Emirates) on 24 Ramadan
1431 A.H., corresponding to 3 September 2010 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee discussed the exposure draft of the standard and made some changes in the light of the comments and remarks of the members.
In its meeting No.  (32) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah,  on 8-9
Rabi' II, 1433 A.H., corresponding to 1-2 March 2012 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the exposure draft of the standard and introduced  the changes it deemed suitable.

The Secretariat of AAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 16 Jumada II, 1433 A.H., corresponding to 7 May 2012 A.D. The publichearingwas attended by representatives ofcentral banks, institutions, auditing firms, Sharf'ah scholars, academics and others interested in this field.  The members  of the  Shari'ah Board and the  Shari'ah Standards Committee responded to a number of observations and comments raised by the participants.

In its meeting No.  (33)  held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah  on  19-21
Shawwal  1433  A.H.,  corresponding  to  6-8  September  2012  A.D.,  the



1208





Shari'ah Standard No. (51): Options to Revoke Contracts Due to Incomplete Performance

Shari'ah Board discussed the changes proposed at the public hearing and introduced the changes it deemed suitable to the draft exposure of the standard.

In its meeting No. (34) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 20-21  Safar
1434 A.H., corresponding to 3-4 November 2013 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the exposure draft ofthe standard, introduced the changes that it deemed suitable and adopted the standard.














































1209





Shari'ah Standard No.  (51): Options to Revoke Contracts  Due to Incomplete Performance





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Option to Reconsider Due to Defect
■  The basis for permissibility ofthe option to reconsider due to defect is the Hadith  narrated  by 'A ' ishah (may Allah be pleased with her) that a man purchased  a young  serf,  and then  set him  to work,  then  he found  him to be "flawed" or "defective': so he returned  him  back (to the seller)  on the grounds  of the defect. Thereupon, the Prophet  (peace be upon him) said:  "No yield without risk taking" and in another narration: "No gain without risk taking.Also, there is the Hadith  on a sheep whose udder is tied up in order to look like a one full with milk. If the defect, lack of milk,  is unveiled,  then  the buyer shall have the option  either to keep it or to return  it along with a Sa' of dates. All Schools of Fiqh (Madhahib) embraced  this option, and that the key principle  in the contracts  of sale is freedom from defects.
■  The basis for the stipulation offreedom from defects is what the companions (may Allah be pleased with them all) used to practice, and Othman  (may Allah be pleased with him) issued a rule in favor of using this option in presence of the companions."
■  The basis for the effect of the option  either to return  the subject matter or keep the entire price -which is the standpoint of Hanafis and Shafts- is that the buyer has the right to return the subject- matter  due to defect and the absence of intactness as generally dictated by the contract. The basis for non-entitlement to compensation  (Arsh) in the case where the buyer keeps the subject-matter  is that descriptions  (features) are not considered to form part ofthe price in this case, and because the buyer did not consent that the sold item was transferred for a less than its stated price. The Han-

(2) Related by Abu Dawud and AI-Tirmidhi.
(3) Related by Malik in  "Al-Muwatta";  and Al-Bayhaqi in  "AI-Sunan AL-Kubra" and he rendered it as an authenticate: "Jami' AI-'Usul" [2: 34].



1210





Shari'ah Standard No.  (51): Options  to Revoke Contracts  Due to Incomplete Performance

balls were of the opinions that in case of return, the buyer shall have the right to request Arsh, corresponding to the inferiority caused by the defect.
Option of Deal Fragmentation
■  The basis for permissibility of deal fragmentation is that it is a type of defect (some Fiqh references categorized it under the option to reconsi• der due to defect) and it becomes binding upon returning of a part ofthe object of sale."
■  The basis for the  stipulation  that  the  buyer  shall not  harbor  prior
knowledge about the deal coming into a point  of defragmentation  is that his knowledge is viewed as evidence to consent, and that the defect is not hidden or concealed.
■  The basis for the effect of the option of defragmentation being either
termination  or holding into the remainder of his share in the price is that discounting an amount from the price for the whole deal in lieu of the missing part of the deal represents compensation, and no more than it, because the price (compensation) is for the two parts and is divided between them both.
Option of Breach of Description
■  The permissibility ofthis option is the opinion ofthe majority of Fuqaha, while other Fuqaha categorized this option under option of deception (Khiyar al-Tadlis).
■  The basis for the establishment of compensation  due to incorrect des• cription is that it is practically similar to the option of freedom from defect, in the case of objection to return the object of sale. And in the case where the buyer accepts to keep the object of sale, then he will pos• sess it for the entire price -without application of Arsh- because what is missing here is a description, and descriptions do not have their corres• ponding part of the price in this instance.
■  The basis for transferability of this option upon death to heirs, whether
general or special, is that it falls in the category of physical asset ('Ayn)
ownership.





(4) "AI-Fatawa AL-Hindiyyah" [3: 83].
(5) "Fath Al-Qadir" [5: 1345]; and  "AI-Bahr AL-Ra 'iq" [6:  19].



1211
















