Shari'ah Standard No. (50)




Irrigation Partnership
(Musaqat)












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                           1179
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................      1180

1. Scope of the Standard..............................................................................      1180
2. Definition of Irrigation Partnership  (Musaqat)....................................      1180
3. Permissibility and Description of the Contract...................................      1180
4. Elements of Irrigation Partnership.........................................................      1180
5. Conditions of Validity (Prerequisites)...................................................      1180
6. Duties of the Worker (Irrigator).............................................................      1181
7. Duties ofthe Owner of the Trees............................................................      1181
8. Joint Duties of the Worker (Irrigator) and the Owner of Trees              1181
9. Division of Produce..................................................................................      1183
10. Contingencies in Irrigation Partnerships............................................      1183
11. Trees Belonging to Third Parties and Usurped Trees.........................      1183
12. Termination  of Irrigation Partnership Contract (Musaqat)                  1184
13. Revocation of Irrigation Partnership Contract (Musaqat)................      1184
14. Zakah Due on Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat)                                  1185
15. Some Applications ofIrrigation Partnership (Musaqat) in Financial
Institutions.................................................................................................      1185
16. Date of issuance ofthe standard...........................................................      1185
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1186
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1187
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard..............................            1189








1177








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to explain the Shari'ah rules and requirements  for Irrigation Partnership  (Musaqat) and its applications in the activities of Islamic financial Institutions.

































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



1179





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (50): Irrigation Partn ership  (Musaqat)





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers the Shari'ah rules and requirements for Irrigation Partnership  (Musaqat) and its applications  in the activities of Islamic financial institutions. It does not cover other forms of agricultural part• nership as they have separate Shari'ah standards dedicated to them.

2. Definition of Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat)

A contract between the owner ofan orchard or its usufruct and a worker (irrigator)  agreeing to share the produce  according to specific ratios stipulated at the time of contract.

3. Permissibility  and Description  of the Contract

Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat) is a permissible contract that becomes binding on commencement of the work or if mutually agreed between the two parties not to terminate the contract before its expiry.

4. Elements of Irrigation Partnership

4/1  Offer and acceptance should be exchanged explicitly or implicitly by means of a recognised form of indication.

4/2 Each of the two parties should be legally competent.

4/3 The relevant trees should be identified, arable (productive), and in need of irrigation and plant husbandry.

5. Conditions  of Validity (Prerequisites)

5/1  The contract should stipulate for each party a predetermined, defined, indivisible share ofthe produce.

5/2  The work should be restricted to the husbandry ofthe crop and trees.
The owner may not (in this contract) demand any additional work from the worker (irrigator).



1180





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (50): Irrigation Partn ership  (Musaqat)

5/3 The contract is valid until the time ofharvest or for a defined period in which the crop is normally enough for harvest.

6. Duties of the Worker (Irrigator)

6/1  The worker (irrigator)  is obligated to care for the trees and crops as per agreement with the owner and customary requirements, in• cluding:

6/1/1  Carrying out plant husbandry by watering, pollinating, fertil• ising, weeding, maintaining and cleaning irrigation channels, pruning, controlling pests, harvesting and performing season• al work that is usually required for each type of tree.

6/1/2 Not commissioning or subcontracting  a third party to carry out his work without the permission of the owner. If he does so, the owner of the trees has the option to ratify the third party contract or reject it.

6/2 The worker (irrigator) may employ others to assist him to carry out part or all of the contracted work.

6/3 The worker (irrigator) acts in a fiduciary capacity and is not liable for any loss arising from other than wilful misconduct, negligence or breach of the terms of the contract. In such a case, he is liable to indemnify the owner against any actual loss caused, but remains entitled to his share of the crop.

7. Duties of the Owner of the Trees

The owner should facilitate for the worker (irrigator) full access to the trees (subject ofcontract), and remove any impediments which may hinder the work ofthe worker (irrigator).

8. Joint Duties of the Worker (Irrigator) and the Owner of Trees

8/1  After harvesting, the worker (irrigator) and the owner are obligated to take care of the crop, each in proportion  to his share. Prior to harvesting, the worker (irrigator) is obligated to take care ofthe crop unless custom or a term of the contract dictates otherwise.



1181





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (50): Irrigation Partn ership  (Musaqat)

8/2  The worker (irrigator) and the owner are responsible for the expenses of the Irrigation Partnership in proportion to their shares, including any Takaful insurance, unless they agree otherwise.

8/3  The worker (irrigator) is solely responsible for performing the work customarily undertaken  by workers (irrigators) in similar Irrigation Partnerships  and such work does not entitle him to any increase in his share of the crop as he is already contractually obligated to carry it out. If he hires others to perform his work, their wage is his sole responsibility and should not be taken from the overall crop. The worker  (irrigator)  may hire, on the account of the Irrigation Partnership, others to perform work that is customarily beyond the scope of his duties.

8/4 If the worker  (irrigator)  refuses to complete the term  of the Irri• gation  Partnership  after commencing  work or entering  into the contract, the owner should demand performance from him. If the worker  (irrigator)  stops working before the crop materializes  he is not entitled to any share. If he stops working after the crop ma• terializes but before it is ready for harvest, a third party should be hired to complete the work and his wage should be deducted from the worker's (irrigator's) share after the crop is harvested and sold If the worker's (irrigator's)  share is not sufficient to pay the third party's wage, the worker  (irrigator)  must make up the difference. If the worker's (irrigator's) share of the crop is more than the third party's wage, he keeps the difference.

8/5  In an Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat) that is due to terminate when the crop materializes or is ready for harvest, if the owner does not enable the worker, and this occurs before the crop materializes, then the owner shall be requested to enable the worker (irrigator) to com• plete his work. If the owner does not enable the worker (irrigator), then the worker (irrigator) shall be entitled to a wage at the market rate for similar work. If this occurs after the crop materializes, the worker (irrigator) is entitled to his stipulated share ofthe crop.



1182





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (50): Irrigation Partn ership  (Musaqat)

9. Division of Produce

9/1  In principle, all recurring produce  of the trees should be shared  as part  of the crop,  such as fruits,  palm  leaves etc.  unless the parties agree to restrict their sharing arrangement to just the fruits.

9/2 The worker (irrigator) is entitled to his share of the crop on an indi•
visible basis as soon as it materializes.

10. Contingencies in Irrigation Partnerships

10/ 1  Ifthe crop does not materialize at all or is completely destroyed by a natural disaster, the worker (irrigator) is not entitled to anything. If the natural  disaster  destroys  only part  of the crop, the parties divide what remains  according  to their stipulated  shares.
10/2  Ifthe crop does not materialize during the stipulated term, the worker (irrigator) has the option either to stop working or to continue his work without a wage until the crop materializes and thereafter takes his share.  If he stops working without a valid excuse, he foregoes his right to a share of the crop when it materializes. If he has a valid excuse, he is entitled to the portion of his share that corresponds to the period of time worked in proportion  to the total time the crop took to materialize.

11. Trees Belonging  to Third Parties and Usurped Trees

11/1  If it transpires  that the trees belong to a third  party, the crop will then  belong  to  him  (the  third  party).  In this  case, the  worker (irrigator) is entitled  to a wage or compensation from the other party  (the usurping party) at the market  rate for similar work but not exceeding (what would have been) his share of the crop.
11/2  If the  worker (irrigator)   enters  into  an  Irrigation  Partnership (Musaqat)  with a party  who, unbeknown to the worker (irriga• tor), has usurped the trees, then  the produce, if any, will belong to the owner ofthe trees and the worker (irrigator) will be entitled to a wage at fair market  rate.  But if the worker  (irrigator)  knew that the trees were usurped,  then  he is not entitled  to any remu• neration.



1183





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (50): Irrigation Partn ership  (Musaqat)

12. Termination  of Irrigation Partnership Contract (Musaqat)

The Irrigation  Partnership (Musaqat)  contract  terminates  upon  the occurrence  of any of the following:

12/1  Harvest and division ofthe crop, if the Irrigation Partnership was linked to the produce of a specific season.

12/2  Completion ofthe agreed term and division ofthe crop in accordance with Item 10/2.

12/3 Death of the worker  (irrigator)  or liquidation  of the institution carrying  out the work if the Irrigation  Partnership  (Musaqat) contract stipulates that the work is non-assignable. If there is no such stipulation, the successor has the option to complete the work on the same terms, either himselfor by hiring workers (irrigators), in return  for the deceased's (or liquidated institution's) share of the crop. If the successor chooses not to complete the work, the owner may complete the work himselfor by hiring others and upon materialization ofthe crop, the successor ofthe worker (irrigator) is entitled to receive a wage at the market rate for similar work for the period of time worked by the deceased (or liquidated institution) but not exceeding his (or its) stipulated share of the crop.

12/4 Death of the trees that are the subject matter  of the contract  or inability ofthe trees to bear fruit.
12/5  Passing of a season without any fruit.

13. Revocation  of Irrigation Partnership Contract (Musaqat)

13/1  Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat) contract is revocable by mutual consent ofthe two parties (Iqalah).

13/2 The owner can revoke the contract in the following situations:

13/2/1 When the worker (irrigator) is unable to perform the work, in which case the following apply:

13/2/1/1 Ifthe worker (irrigator) is unable to work for a reason outside his control, such as an illness, he is entitled to receive a wage



1184





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (50): Irrigation Partn ership  (Musaqat)

at the  market  rate for similar  work for the period  of time worked.
13/2/1/2 If the worker (irrigator) is unable to work for a reason within his control, he is entitled to receive a wage at the market rate for similar work for the period oftime worked. He is also liable to indemnify the owner for actual loss suffered, as determined by experts.

13/2/2 When  the  worker  (irrigator)  stops  working  and  it is not possible to enforce  him (to fulfil the terms of the contract).

13/3  The worker (irrigator) is entitled to revoke the contract ifthe owner refuses to allow him to work. [see item 8/5]

14. Zakat Due on Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat)

See Sharf'ah Standard No. (35) on Zakat, item 5/4/9.

15. Some Applications  of Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat) in Financial
Institutions

15/1 The institution may  enter  into  Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat) contracts with the owners  of trees and then  hire workers (irriga• tors) to carry out the work.

15/2  The institution can own trees and enter into Irrigation Partnership
(Musaqat)  contracts with other parties  to carry out the work.

16. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Shari'ah Standard was issued on 21 Safar, 1434 A.H., corresponding to 4 January 2013 A.D.















1185





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (50): Irrigation Partn ership  (Musaqat)





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah standard on Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat) was adopted
by the Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. (34) held during the period of20-21
Safar, 1434 A.H., corresponding to 3-4 January 2013 A.D.













































1186





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (50): Irrigation Partn ership  (Musaqat)





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 24Dhul-Qadah 1431 A.H., corresponding to 30 November 2010 A.D., the Secretariat of AAOIFI decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat).

In its meeting No. (30) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain, on 24-26 Jumada II, 1432 A.H., corresponding to 27-29 May 2011 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed the exposure draft ofthe standard and introduced the changes it deemed suitable.

In its meeting No. (31) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain, on 22-24 Dhul• Qa'dah 1432 A.H., corresponding to 20-21 October 2011 A.D., the Shari'ah Board also discussed the exposure draft ofthe standard and introduced the changes it deemed suitable.

In its meeting No.  (32) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah,  on 8-9
Rabi' II, 1433  A.H., corresponding to 1-2 March 2012 A.D.,  the Sharf'ah Board continued its discussions on the draft exposure of the standard and introduced the changes it deemed suitable.

The Secretariat of AAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 16 Jumada II, 1433 A.H., corresponding to 7 May 2012 A.D. The public hearingwas attended by representatives ofcentral banks, institutions, auditing firms, Sharf'ah scholars, academics and others interested in this field.  The members  of the  Shari'ah Board and the  Shari'ah Standards Committee responded to a number of observations and comments raised by the participants.

In its meeting No. (33) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 19-21 Shawwal
1433 A.H., corresponding to 6-8 September 2012 A.D., the Shari'ah Board



1187





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (50): Irrigation Partn ership  (Musaqat)

discussed the changes proposed at the public hearing and introduced the changes it deemed suitable to the draft exposure of the standard.

In its meeting No. (34) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 20-21 Safar
1434 A.H., corresponding to 3-4 November 2013 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the exposure draft ofthe standard, introduced the changes that it deemed suitable and adopted the standard.

In its meeting No.  (35) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munwwarah on 22-23
Shawwal 1434 A.H., corresponding  to 29-30 September 2013 A.D., the Shari'ah Board continued  its discussions on the  exposure draft of the standard, and introduced the changes it deemed suitable, and adopted the standard.







































1188





Sharf'ah Standard No. (50): Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat)





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Permissibility of Musaqat and Its Rationale
■  The basis for the permissibility of Musaqat is  the Sunnah, Ijma and common sense. From the Sunnah, there is the Hadith narrated by Ibn Umar that the Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) gave the land of Khaybar to its inhabitants to work on and cultivate in return for half of its yield (fruits and plants).
Based on  Ijma, the  companions  (may Allah be pleased with them) practiced Musaqat in Khaybar until Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) evacuated them therefrom, without any objection from whosoever. Ijma' or consensus (by Four Schools of Fiqh) as to permissibility of Musaqat was cited by prominent scholars Al-Bisyawi, Ibn Hazm and Al•
'Utabi, Muwaffaq Al-Din Ibn Qudamah, Shams Al-Din Ibn Qudamah
and Al-Shamakhi, the author of "Ghayat Al-Bayan",  Ibn Muflih and Al• Buhuti.

On the basis of common sense, Musaqat fulfils the interest ofboth par•
ties, and is associated with no harm.

Its permissibility may also be deduced in analogy with Mudarabah.
■  The basis for bindingness ofMusaqat once it has been entered into or un• dertaken is the overarching Quranic Verse:  {"O you who believe! Fulfil (your) obligations}.

(2) Related by Al-Bukhari, Chapter on Muzara'ah for half of the produce, and so on. Also, related by Muslim, Chapter on Musaqat for part of the fruits and plants.
(3) See  "AL-Mukhtasar",  AI-Bisyawi,   (P.  291);   "Al-Jami", Abu Al-Hasan, [49:  4];  "AL•
Muhalla", [8/230]; "AL-Diya", [18: 245]; "AL-Mughni", [5: 549-552]; "Al-Sharh AL-Kabir", [5: 557]; "AL-Idah" [6: 233]; "AL-Bahr AL-Ra 'iq" [8: 64]; "AL-Mubdi"  [5: 46]; and "Kashf Al-Qina" [3: 533].
(4) [A1-Ma 'idah (The Table): 1].



1189





Sharf'ah Standard No. (50): Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat)

Elements of Musaqat Contract
■  The basis for stipulating legal competency in a Musaqat contract is the
Prophet's Hadith:  "The Pen has been liftedfrom writing the deeds ofthree: The one who is asleep until one wakes up,  the child until he/she becomes
pubescent and the insane until he/she becomes sane °
■  The basis for the necessity for identification of trees (subject matter of
the contract), and the stipulation of the trees being arable (productive) in usual circumstances is avoidance of Gharar. Trees that are not arable (productive) do not fit the purpose ofMusaqat.
■  The basis for the stipulation of irrigation and cultivation of trees is that work is one of the requisite elements ofthe contract (Arkan), and Musa• qat is invalid in the absence of one of its requisite elements.
Prerequisites of Validity
■  The basis for specification of a predetermined, common share for both parties to the contract is the Hadith narrated by Ibn Omar that the Prophet (peace be upon him)  gave the land of Khaybar to its inhabitants to work on and cultivate in return  for half of its yield (fruits  and plants). The specification oflump-sum compensation will divert the contract away from the features of Musaqat. The determination of a known compensation is meant to avert impermissible obscurity (Jahalah).
■  The basis for the confinement ofwork to fruit growing and tree cultiva• tion is that this what entails work in Musaqat; if another form of work is stipulated in the contract, such a stipulation shall contradict the very nature of the contract, as it only fulfils the interests of one party at the expense of the other.
■  The basis for making the term of Musaqat equal to the period ending
with the time the produce materializes or over a term enough for the produce to materialize is the rules of justice in Sharf'ah so that the trees owner does not exclusively benefit from the produce while the worker receives nothing.  The produce is what the contract is meant to achieve after all, and therefore it is impermissible that the worker is devoid ofhis/ her rights by shortening the term of Musaqat.

(5) Related by Abu Dawud in the Chapter on an insane stealing or becoming liable to punishment.



1190





Sharf'ah Standard No. (50): Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat)

Obligations of the Worker (Irrigator)
■  The basis for the worker's obligation to undertake normal care ofthe trees and for the produce  of fruits is that the people of Khaybar were entrusted with the work, without  anyone else being sent by the Prophet  (peace be upon him) to take up some of Musaqat works.
■  The basis for the prohibition  of sub-contracting  in Musaqat without prior permission is that the trees are not the property ofthe worker (irrigator), nor the worker is authorized by the owner oftrees to do so. And notwithstanding, the owner may not accept that the worker (irrigator) assigns the Musaqat contract to a third-party irrigator.
■    The basis for the permissibility  of using the services of hired  hands  or the like by the worker  (irrigator) is the  general  condition  cited by the Prophet  (peace be upon  him) to the people of Khaybar  that  "they may seek the services of hired hands, but only at their own expense. However, the worker's responsibility/liability shall not cease to exist.°
■  The basis for the Musaqat worker  acting in a fiduciary  capacity (rather than  a position  of liability) is that  he/she is an  agent  on behalf  of the owner in preservation and care of trees and fruits.
Obligations of Trees Owner
■  The basis for the necessity to enable unfettered disposal of the trees for the worker is to allow the worker to perform his duties as per the contract.
Joint Obligations of the Worker and the Owner of Trees
■  The basis for the joint responsibility of the owner of trees and the worker for the preservation  of fruits before harvesting is that the owner may take the fruits after harvesting,  However, before harvesting, the worker alone shall be responsible for the trees and fruits because the owner has granted him unfettered access to the trees.
■  The basis for the division of expenses between the owner and the worker (from their  respective shares)  is that it is more just (closer to justice) so that no harm  is inflicted upon either party because of the other.
■  The basis for obligating the worker to complete the work is that Musaqat is a contract that becomes binding upon commencement  of work, so that

(6) Related by Muslim, Chapter on Musaqat for part of the fruits and plants. Also, related by Abu Dawud, Chapter on Musaqat.



1191





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (50): Irrigation Partn ership  (Musaqat)

neither party shall have the right to revoke it unilaterally. And the basis for the non-entitlement ofthe worker to any compensation in case he stopped the work before materialization  of the produce  is that  he abandoned his obligation  toward  completion  of work and is thus  not  entitled  to receive a share of the produce before materialization. And if the produce materializes, then another  hand may be hired to complete the work at the expense of the worker because in such a case the worker (Al-Musaqi) is entitled to receive a share and shall not be deprived of it, and he shall complete the work, and such an obligation shall not be considered fulfilled unless work is completely carried out. Otherwise, the wage of the hired hands shall be deducted from the share ofthe worker (Al-Musaqi).
■  The basis for obligating the owner oftrees, in case he prevented the worker
from carrying out the work ofMusaqat, to completely fulfil the contract is that the Musaqat contract becomes binding upon commencement ofwork or upon commitment ofnon-revocation (ofthe contract). And in the event that the owner revokes the contract before the produce materializes, the basis for obligating the owner to pay out the prevailing market wages is that the time and effort ofthe worker shall have to be compensated. And in the event that the owner revokes the contract after the produce materializes, then the worker is only entitled to his share in the produce (but not the prevailing market wages).
Division of the Produce
■  The basis for the inclusivity of division of recurring produce is that the worker  contributes with his work to the produce and thus shall not be deprived ofhis respective share. This roughly conforms to the standpoint of Ibadis and Malkis jurists, and coincides with the opinion of some of Hanifis. It has reported that Abu Said Al-Khudri opined that the worker deserves a share in the palm racemes and cotton straws, unless there is a customary practice ('Urf) or a condition  (Shart) to the contrary. Abu Amr Al-Qurtubi also said: "Torn palm leaves and fibers and cords shall be shared by both parties according to their respective shares in the fruits': and this conforms to the law of equity.

(7) "Bayan Al-Shar" [40: 292 and 296]; and  "AL-Kaft" [2: 107].



1192





Sharf'ah Standard No. (50): Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat)

■  The basis for specification of the worker's share as a common  share is the Hadith narrated  by Rafi' on the authority  ofHanzhalah Ibn Qays Al-An• sari who said:  "I asked Raft' Ibn Khadij about paying the rental of a land in gold and silver. He answered:  'There  is no objection to it,  as people in the times of the Prophet (peace be upon him) used to pay rental for plants growing on water ravines/flumes/gullies and high points  of streams and some sorts ofplants. However, the Prophet (peace be upon him) prohibited such practices because the produce  was not properly identified: Some of it used to grow and some used to perish,  and people,  at that time,  were
confined to this kind ofrentals".(9
■  The basis for the entitlement of the worker to his respective share upon materialization of the produce  is that he has contributed to the materia• lization. It is the opinion  of some of Shafis and the majority  of Hanbalis, and it is also followed by Imamis.
Contingencies in Musaqat
■  The basis for non-entitlement of the worker to anything (reward or com• pensation) ifthe produce perished or destroyed by a natural disaster is that one of the effects of partnership  entails that the subject-matter of division is the produce. Therefore, ifthe produce perished or destroyed, then there shall be no division. The same applies to the division of remaining produce in case of partial destruction  due to a natural disaster.
■  The basis for granting  the worker  the option,  in case of non-materiali• zation  of the produce  during  the predetermined period  of time,  either to carry  on his work gratis, or to stop working  and lose his share in the produce, is as dictated by the rules of equity .  The owner of trees benefits through  keeping his trees, even if there is no produce. Any worker with an acceptable  excuse is an exception, where  he shall be entitled  to his share for the worked period  of time, as dictated by the rules of equity.
Trees Belonging  to Third Parties and Usurped Trees
■  The basis for the owner oftrees being entitled to the fruits ifit transpires that the trees belong to a third party is that in essence ownership of fruits shall

(8) Related by Muslim, Chapter on rental oflands, payment in gold and silver.
(9) "KashfAl-Qina" [3:  538]; "AL-Mughni" [5: 576]; "AL-Mubdr" [5: 54]; "AL-Rawdah" [5:
160]; and "Jami' Al-Maqasid"  [7: 376].



1193





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (50): Irrigation Partn ership  (Musaqat)

remain in the hands of the owner unless by virtue of a contract. However, the contract,  in this case, is void. The basis for obligating the party  who contracted with the worker to pay out the prevailing wage to the maximum ofhis stated share is that he worked on a commutative basis, and the contract was doubtful  (not  properly  evidenced  or documented);  it is impractical to pay him  the  agreed compensation  due to the ownership  of the third party, who shall be entitled to the compensation; i.e., the prevailing wage, up to a maximum  of his stated share because the contracting party did not commit  to pay him more than  his share,  especially that no transgression was premeditated.
■  The basis for entitlement  of the owner of trees to take the fruits in case an usurper  (Ghasib) of the trees contracted  with  someone  else to carry out Musaqat  works  is that  the  fruits  remain,  in  essence, owned by the owner unless by a contract to the contrary. And the contract here is void. The basis for obligating the usurper  (Ghasib) to pay the worker who was unaware  of usurpation  is that  it is tantamount to a paid work  (work on a commutative basis) associated with a doubtful contract; it is impossible to pay him the agreed compensation because it belongs to someone else, who shall be entitled to the compensation; i.e., the prevailing wage. The worker shall be deprived of any payment  if he is aware of usurpation because in such a case he becomes a transgressor, and he is among those referred to in
the Hadith:  "Ill-gotten sapling shall have no right therein".(9

Termination  of Musaqat Contract
■  The basis for termination of Musaqat  contract  upon  completion  of pro• duce and division of the crop or passing of the agreed period of time or of a season without  any fruit  is the application  of the contract  that entered into by the two parties.
■  The basis for termination  of Musaqat contract upon the death of the worker or liquidation ofthe institution carrying out the work ifMusaqat was subject to the condition  of work commencement  solely by him or the institution is that the condition was not met. The basis for granting the heirs (either through inheritance, in general, or by transfer of ownership, in particular)

(10) Related by Al-Bukhari, Chapter on wasteland rehabilitation. Also related by Malik, Chapter on building on wasteland



1194





Sharf'ah Standard No. (50): Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat)

the option either to carry on the work as per the set conditions or to stop it is that the heirs or the owners of the institution have had legally inherited this right. The basis for their entitlement to the prevailing wage is that their testator was entitled to the compensation by virtue of his efforts. So if he had died before the produce materialized, then he shall be entitled to the com• pensation. The basis for limiting the compensation, which is the prevailing wage, to a maximum of the testator's share in the produce is that the owner of trees did not commit to pay more than the worker's share. And if conti• nuation of work by the heirs does not entitle them to more than the share of their testator in the produce, then how shall they deserve more without work?
■  The basis for termination of Musaqat  contract  upon  perishing  of trees,
subject matter  of the contract,  or inability of the trees to bear fruit is the Hadith  stating:  "There should  be neither  harm nor malice", because the worker will be excessively harmed ifhe is obligated to work gratis (without compensation).
Revocation of Musaqat Contract
■  The basis for revocation of Musaqat contract by mutual consent of the two parties is the Hadith of Prophet Mohammad  (peace be upon him) stating: "Anyone who consents to revoke the contract upon the request ofa regretting
counterparty, Allah shallforgive  his regretful sins on the Day ofJudgment".
■  The basis for obligation to pay the prevailing wage if the worker is unable to perform the work due to a reason out of his control is that the worker did exert an effort under a contract, therefore he shall be entitled to a compen• sation against that work, and that the work has not been performed  in its entirety, and thus he is paid the prevailing market wage.
■  The basis for liability ofthe worker to indemnify the owner for actual loss suffered for a reason within  his control is that he caused such a loss, and therefore shall be liable.






(11) Related by Ibn Hibban, Chapter on Iqalah.



1195






















