







'
STANDARDS
Full  Text of Shari'ah  Standards  for  Islamic  Financial
Institutions  As at  Safar  14394.H.  -- November 2017 A.D.




























ACCOUNTING  AND AUDITING  ORGANIZATION FOR ISLAMIC  FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS













































SHARI' AH
STANDARDS







€ The  Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial Institutions, 2015

King Fahd National Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data
The Accounting and Auditing Organization fur Islamic Financial Institutions
Shari'ah Standards. / 'Ihe Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial
Institutions.-   Manama, 2015
1262p;  24x17  a
ISBN:  6-9616-01-603-978
-1  Finance (Islamic  Law)             ] Title
275.5 d             171/1437
L.D.  no,  168/1437
ISBN: 6-9616-01-603-978




B8AA0r1    ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING ORGANIZATION FOR ISLAMIC FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
PO. Box 1176, Manama, Kingdom af Bahrain Telephone:  (17375400 (973+ - Fr:  (17250194  (973+ E-mail:  inf @aaoifi.com
Website:  www.aaoif.com







Worldwide  Distribution: Dar AIMaiman for Publishing & Distributing
For online shopping, visit our website: www.daralmaiman.com For more information  Email us Info@daralmaiman.com Connect with us via twitter: @DarAlMaiman
Phone  :   +966 11   4627336     Fr   :   +966  11   4612163
Mobile :   +966 500004568      Moblle :   +966  505455097


No Unauthorized Photocopying
All rights  reserved for Accounting and Auditing  Organization for  Islamic Financial Institutions.  Without permission in writing,  no part of  this publication may be transla ted, reprinted or reproduced or utilized in any form either in whole or in part or by any electronic, mechanical or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying  and recording,  or in any information storage and retrieval system.

AAOIFI's Shari'ah Standards are published both in Arabic and English.  In case of  any difference between the two texts, the Arabic  text shall prevail.  Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial Institutions is not responsible for  any  negative consequences occasioned to any person acting or refraining from action as a result of any material in this publication due  to its usage.














SHARI' AH
STANDARDS
Full  Text of Shari'ah  Standards  for  Islamic  Financial
Institutions  as  at Safar  1437  A.H.  - December  2015  A.D.




















5A\0












Foreword by AAOIFI Secretary General


Praise be to Allah,  Lord  of the Worlds,  and Allah's blessings and peace be upon  the  noblest  of Messengers,  Prophet  Muhammad,   and  upon  his household and the companions, and those who follow their example with good conduct  until the Day of Judgment.
It  is of Allah's  Grace that He bestowed on us the great religion of Islam, and made  us  the  best Ummah  raised up for  mankind,  one that  is  graced with  the  noblest  of Prophets  and  Heavenly  Books  and  religious  codes. This  comprehensive  religious  code encompassed  and ordained  all things beneficial  to humankind   in this  life  and  in the Hereafter,  and prohibited and banned  all evils and vices,  as made clear in the Noble  Qur 'an:
{".. Today,  I have perfected your religion for you,  and completed My
favour upon you,  and have granted Islam  as a religion for you..'},(

One of the basic pillars of Islamic Faith is the belief in, and perseverance towards, the preservation of the well-being of people, and solid establishment of markets,  trade,  finances,  and to distance all of which  from prohibitions sanctioned in the Qur 'an and the Sunn ah;  namely, Riba, Gharar, gambling, illegal appropriation  of peoples'  wealth,  etc.  This  is  also embodied  in the keenness to observe prohibitions  in the area of financial transactions  and contracts, especially when  it  comes to honoring  obligations,  honesty  and straightforwardness,  mutual consent of contracting  parties,  and so on.

Based on this set of norms and values, the Islamic finance industry  was established  and  has attained  its  current  paramount  status, as  manifosted in its growth ct a pace greater than that of all other financial sectors. By so doing,  it will hopefully be a boon for all peoples  and nations of the world.

The cornerstone  of the Islamic  finance  industry  is,  and will always be, the adherence  to,  and compliance with, the rules and principles of Sharf'ah,

(I)  [AI-Ma' idah (The Table):  3]



5





Foreword  by AAOIFI Secretary General

under  the broader  collective reasoning  by prominent Shari'ah scholars  and jurists,  and based  on evidences  found  in the  Qur 'an  and  the  Sunnah,  in an attempt  to deduce  Shari'ah  rulings  that  fit current-day reality and prac• tices.

In this  regard, the volume  of  Shari'ah Standards has become  the major compilation of contemporary Fiqh reasoning in the area of Fiqh al-M uamalat (Jurisprudence of Financial  Transactions)  around  the globe.  The standards cover a large  array  of Islamic  financial  contracts and products,  including those pertaining to banking, Islamic insurance, investment  banking, capital markets,  financing,  and so on.

These standards have acclaimed wide popularity within the global Islamic finance  industry,  and  are deemed  the  most  outstanding  Shari'ah  reference for this  industry  and  its various stakeholders,  including legislative bodies, regulatory   authorities,   and  financial   institutions,   and  other   prof zssional entities such as law firms, accounting  and consultancy firms,  in addition  to universities,  academic  institutions  and  research  centers  and  Fatwa issuing bodies.

Currently, AAOIFI Standards are officially adopted by a number d central banks and financial  authorities on a mandatory  basis or as guidance.  Hence, these standards are viewed as a major hallmark for the Islamic fi nance industry and one of its principal accomplishments.

These standards would have not achieved such a prominence and outreach, with Allah's Grace and Guidance  first and  utmost,  had there  been no great efforts  exerted by the  Shari'ah  scholars and Fuqaha and a host of experts and professionals, volunteering a great deal of their time towards this great cause.
The success of these standards can be attributed to a set of factors, primarily the  thorough  scholarly   methodology  (the   due   process)   that   AAOIFI follows  in  its efforts  to develop  and issue the standards.  The development process is  carried  out through  more than  ten stages, commencing  with the commissioning of consultants to prepare  the exposure  drafts. The exposure draft  is   then   submitted  to the  respective  Shari'.ah  Standards  Committee which  discusses and reviews it, and then forwards it to the Sharf'ah  Board  to



6





Foreword  by AAOIFI Secretary General

further  discuss and review it,  coming  up with the draft standard.  The draft standard is then presented at a public hearing (one or more) where the Islamic finance  institutions  can  discuss  it  with  Fuqaha,  experts  and professionals hailing from these institutions in order to make certain  the draft standard  is meticulous  and of high quality, covering all practical  aspects and emerging practices  faced by  the  industry  practitioners.  The remarks  and comments presented  at the public  hearing  will be discussed  by  the Sharf'ah  Board  to introduce the changes it  deemed  suitable and finally adopt the standard.  At this stage,  the standard  is presented  to the drafting  committee  to edit its text for publication.

One of  the major strengths  of these standards  is  reflected in the collective efforts made by  the Shari'ah Board which consists of 20 prominent  Shari'ah scholars from around the world. This ensures globality and wide geographical outreach  of these standards  in addition  to accounting  for various localities, jurisdictions,  applications  and customary  practices,  etc.  The standards  also embody  the  scholarly  background   diversification  among  board  members, as all major  schools  of Islamic  Law are  duly  represented,  and  various specializations  are taken  into consideration  in its formation  (from  judiciary to Fatwa issuing,  consultancy,,  research,  authorship,  law,  and economic  and fi nancial advisory,  etc.).

These  standards   also  pay  special  attention   to  noting  down  classical Fiqh compendiums across ages,  in the area of fl nancial transactions,  select• ing the most  practical  and  convenient  out  of these  references, and giving preponderance to specific  rulings  in the form  of a classified  and  typified standard.  Furthermore, the standards account  for modern applications of Islamic  fi nancial  contracts  and  products   and  relevant  emerging  matters. They  also grant  special  consideration  to the  use of unified  terminology and  disambiguation  of its different  components  and  aspects:  technical, legal,  accounting, financial,  etc. Moreover,  the standards involve the pro• cess of deriving  Shari'ah  rulings  to address  all pertaining matters  and  to provide  guidance  to the process  of differentiation  between  impermissible and  permissible   transactions  and  practices  all in one  neat,  summarized compilation.

The Shari'ah  Board has made  incumbent  upon  itself, in view of the fast pace of development  and change in the Islamic finance industry,  to review



7





Foreword  by AAOIFI Secretary  General

existing standards. It formed  from amongst its members a special committee for that purpose.  The committee  reviews all remarks and comments  raised by scholars and  experts  on the  form  and substance  of the  standards.  The reviews, in a bid to address the industry's requirements as to emerging matters, have resulted  in three  classes of standards:  (I)  Standards  whose items and paragraphs  were updated  to  remove ambiguity  and clarify their  meanings and the rulings embedded  therein,  or to present  more precise  presentation of content and so on.  (II) Standards  to which new paragraphs were added or
existing paragraphs were merged or omitted, so that the general structure  of the standard  is  maintained.  (III) Standards which the board deemed in need of a new preparation  and development,  in order  to account for the sizable emerging matters and changes relating  to the topic  cf the standard  such as the Shari'ah  Standards  on Sukuk, Debit Card,  Charge Card and Credit Card, and so on. The development process for such standards  has commenced and is  under way.

The new version of AAOIFI Shari'ah  Standards  has included  a number of reviewed and revised standards (of types  l and 2, as mentioned above). These standards  are labeled  with a "Revised Standard"  designation.

We are ever thankful  to  Allah  that  issuance  of the  new version  in its elegant layout  has been  completed  both  in hardcopy  and digital  formats. A total of 15 new Shari'ah standards  have been translated  and added to the English volume.  As such, all Shari'ah  standards,  included  in this edition, have been issued both in Arabic and English. New standards are also under preparation  and are currently at different  stages of the due process.
The  newly translated   standards  that  have been  added  to this  edition went  through  three  extensive stages in  implementation   of proper quality control  measures. The first stage constituted institutional  efforts made by the International  Shari'ah  Research  Academy for Islamic  Finance  (ISRA)  and the Islamic Development  Bank  (IDB).  The second  stage involved  revision by  a legal expert  (lawyer) who examined  the translation from the angle cf accuracy and faithfulness  to the original text and legal vocabulary.  Finally, in the third  stage,  the Translation  Committee,  consisting  of the Honorable Chairman  of the Shari'ah  Board  and  four esteemed  members,  edited  and



8





Foreword by AAOIFI Secretary General

fine-tuned  the translation  through  ten meetings,  some of which spanned
3 successive   days.  Tb all of them,  we extend  our sincere  appreciation and best wishes.  I would also like to thank my colleague Mr. Mohammad Majd Bakir  (Corporate  Development  Manager,  AAOIFI)  for  his outstanding efforts to accomplish this project.
We warmly welcome your remarks and feedback, including errata, on existing standards  and your proposals as to new standards,  on our email: sharia@aaoifi.com

With sincere wishes and best regards,


Dr. Hamed Hassan Merah

23 Dhaul-Qal1ah,  1436 A.H.,  7 September 2015 A.D.





































9











Foreword by Shari'ah Boards  Chairman


Praise be to Allah,  Lord  of the Worlds,  and peace be upon  our  master Muhammad,  the last-sent  Prophet  and the leader of Prophets,  and on all his household  and the companions, and those who follow their example in good conduct  till the Day of Judgment.

As to what follows,

Islamic banking does  considerably differ from its conventional counterpart in terms  of principles,  norms,  values,  and practices.  The specialty of Islamic banking  and the soundness  of its transactions  must  be  clearly reflected in accounting treatments so that no confusion arises, and no mistakes are committed  in practice.  Conventional  accounting  cannot serve the purpose, as it is  based co a different  set  of norms  and values.  Therefore,  it was vital that Islamic banks and financial institutions (IFis) have their own accounting standards, rather titan conventional ones. The development cf the standards was  and  is  still a gigantic  task that  draws on the  great  efforts  exerted  by Shari'ah scholars and professional experts alike. Since inception in 1411 A.H. (corresponding  to  1991  A.D.),  AAOIFI has been exerting a lot  di efforts  in
the preparation  di accounting standards for Islamic financial institutions and
auspiciously the standards have been well received by the  industry, especially in the area oflslamic banking where Islamic banks follow them ona mandatory basis or as guidance,  based on regulatory  enforcement  by central banks  in many countries  around  the globe.  Subsequently,  AAOIFI  decided  to issue Shari'ah  standards  in the same  way it had issued its accounting standards,  in order to  provide a reference for Islamic banks and fi nancial  institutions  to comply with  Shari'ah  in  their transactions  and products  and to harmonize various  Fatwas  issued  by  different Shari'ah Supervisory  Boards  (SSBs).  To that end, AAOIFI formed its  Shari'ah  Board in 1419  A.H.  (corresponding  to
1999  A.D.)  consisting  of Sharf'ah  scholars versed with Fiqh  al-Muaamalat
(Islamic  commercial   and  financial  jurisprudence),   especially  in  the  area



10





Foreword by Shari'ah Board's Chairman

of Islamic  banking.  The  Board,  with Allah's  Grace,  has managed  to  issue more  than 54 standards   hitherto,  covering  a wide array  of Shari'ah  rules pertaining   to financial  transactions   of Islamic financial  institutions   (IFIs). These  standards  have become  a reliable reference  for  the Islamic banking
industry,  and an essential part ct academic curricula  in universities, colleges
and schools  offering education  on Islamic banking.

The Board  exerts due diligence  to develop these standard's  through  the due process  which  initiatives  with commissioning of a consultant/scholar knowledgeable  in the area relevant to the topic of the standard. An additional study will be conducted  to take into consideration  all relevant issues  in light of the Noble Qur 'an, the Sunn ah,  and major schools  of Islamic  Law, setting out  Shari'ah  basis and  newly emerging  matters  along with contemporary Fiqh views. Then, an exposure draft is prepared  for the prospective standard. The study and exposure draft will be submitted to a committee  formed from
amongst the Board members  in addition  to a number ct external, specialized
scholars.  For that purpose,  the Board  formed four committees  that convene to review the exposure  draft  and  prepare  it  for  submission  to the Shari'ah Board.  The Board  used to convene every week and other  week in Makkah Al-Mukarramah  and  Al-Madinah   Al-Munawwarah,  in turns.  It currently convenes only four times a year at least, two in the Two Holy Cities, and two elsewhere.

Afterward, the exposure drafts reviewed by the committees  are discussed line in line out in the Board's meetings in a deliberate and unhindered  manner, until  a  standard  is  adopted   based  on  consensus   or  the  opinion   of the majority.  Thereafter,  AAOIFI holds a public hearing  to present  and discuss
the proposed  standard  with a host of scholars  and practitioners who voice
their  views and opinions,  whether  in  the form  of deletions,  additions,  or amendment. The fedback will be presented  to the Board again in its  next meeting for discussion. This will represent  an opportunity for the Board to discuss the standard  for the last  time before issuance,  where  it can add or delete or amend it as deemed  appropriate after extensive discussions. At this stage, the due process completes  and the standard  is  officially adopted  and issued.



11





Foreword by Shari'ah  Board's Chairman

In this regard, two important facts are worth  noting;

First,  these  standards  are issued  by the Board,  not  by an individual  or an ad-hoc  group of individuals.  Hence, the rulings  and provisions  reached at in the  standards  shall  not  be attributed  to  a specific  member   in  his personal   capacity.  The  Board  follows a professional  methodology as do most  similar  international bodies.  Its decisions  are taken  by the majority of members,   while  those  members   with  opposing  views or  reservations will be referred  to along with their views or reservations  in the minutes of meetings. The  decisions  will be issued under  the name  of the Board  and points  of incongruity will not be mentioned. Most of the provisions  in the standards   issued 'by  the Board  are typically  agreed  on by all members.  It is not  unusual,  however,  that  diffierent points of view often  emerge  as to rulings  developed  on the basis cf reasoning  (ljtihad),  especially in relation to new  occurrences and  issues  (Nawazil).  If incongruity on  some  issues lingers  on  after  open  deliberations,  the  Board  would  take  its  decisions based  on  the  majority  of views,  and  the points  of incongruity would  be noted  down  in the  minutes  as is  the  usual  procedure without   referring thereto  in the body of the standard.

Second,  despite the above-mentioned  steps followed by the Board in its keenness  to  take  prudent   measures  in  the  process  of standards   issuance, this  all remains  a human  endeavor  that is  fallible  by nature,  where mistakes and oversight  are not completely ruled  out,  and inf »llibility  only belongs to Prophets and Messengers (peace be upon them). Therefore, the Board formed a  review committee  to look into its existing standards.  Should a mistake or oversight be pinpointed,  or should there be any suggestion for  improvement
of the  standards,  we  would  be  thankful  to  receive  feedback  from  scholars
(please  address  them  to  AAOIFTs  General  Secretariat,  which  will submit them in tum  to the Board  through  the review committee,  Allah's Willing)

Lastly,  I would like to extend  my appreciation to all Board  members  for their  invaluable  efforts and contributions to the realization  of this splendid achievement,  purely  dedicated  to Allah,  and  also for  the  spirit  of under• standing they exhibited during  constructive  scholarly deliberations. I would also like to  thank  AAOIFI  for  its  remarkable   initiative  embodied   in this



12





Foreword by Shari'ah Board's Chairman

outstanding  accomplishment  and for its unwavering efforts to support  and facilitate the errand  ct the Board  as it saved no means to arrange  the Board's meetings, to iron  out all obstacles and difficulties, and to follow up on the Board's  resolutions  and communicate  them  to all parties  concerned.  I  do
supplicate to Allah to amply reward all those who sincerely contributed  to•
wards this work, and I pray that Allah accept it and extend its  benefits to
people everywhere.

And praise be to Allah,  first and foremost,

Muhammad Taqi Usmani









































13












Table of Contents



Subject                                                                                       Page

Foreword by AAOIFI Secretary  General..............................................            5
Foreword by Shari'ah  Board's  Chairman......ass.sass.sass·ss.sass·a...6ass,           10

Introduction..........................................................................................          19
Organizational Structure..............................................................................          26

Shari'ah  Standards
1.   SS  (1):  Trading in Currencies................................................................          47
2SS  (2):  Debit Card,  Charge Card and Credit Card...............................          67
3.  SS  (3):  Procrastinating Debtor................................................................          83
4.  SS  (4):  Settlement of Debt by Set-Off.....................................................        103
5.  SS  (5):  Gu a ran tees....................................................................................        119
6.   SS  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional Bank  to an Islamic  Bank.....          147
7.  SS  (7):  Hawalah.........................................................................................        171
8.  SS  (8):  Murabahah....................................................................................        195
9.  SS  (9):  ljarah and Ijarah  Muntahia Bittamleek.....................................        233
IO.  SS  (10):  Sa1am and Parallel  Salam............................................................        267
11.   SS (11):  Istisna'a  and Parallel  lstisna'a.....................................................        291
12.  SS  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah)  and Modern Corporations............        32l
13.  SS  (13): Mudarabah...................................................................................        365
14.  SS  (14):  Documentary Credit.................................................................        391
15.  SS  (15):  Ju'.alah...........................................................................................        421
16.  SS  (16):  Commercial Papers....................................................................        439
17.  SS  (17)  Investment Sukuk ...........s.so.sos.coos.o.coo.so.o.so...so............      463
18.  SS  (18):  Possession (Qabd)......................................................................        489

19.  SS  (19):  Loan (Qard)................................................................................        513
20.  SS  (20):  Sale of Commodities in Organized Markets..........................        535



15





Table  of Contents


21.   S3  (21):  Financial  Paper (Shares  and Bonds)....................a............

22.  S3  (22):  Concession  Contracts.............so........sos.s...sass.s.so.a...s..o..
23.  SS (23):  Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned  Agent (Fodooli) ..

24,  SS (24):  Syndicated Financing......«oo»sos»ass«oooso»so»sos+so»so.
25.   SS(25):  Combination  of Contracts.............................a....a..........a......

26,   5S  (26)  Islamic Insurance ..............sos.sos.sos.sos.so.so.so.so.o

27.   $S (27)  Indices.~                                                                                      .
28.   SS  (28):  Banking  Services  in Islamic  Banks...........................................
29.  SS   (29):  Stipulations  and Ethics of Fatwa in the Institutional  Frame•
work oi: i•i,ii,iili'ii■i+ii iii+ iliitH: itt i•·· ··,...., ···:i- ii,i i-i U i,ii ,ii,ii,H •ii •,.. i■ ..... " •••• i, ....i,. .U --i, iii,H, ii ,i,. i-iiiii•'"' •i•
30.   SS  (30):  Monetization  (Twarruu) ........so.sssss«sass.sos.sos.a.sos.sos..

31.   SS  (31):  Controls on  Gharar  in Financial Transactions  .......................

32SS  (32):  Arbitration  .......ours«so o n+so+ o rs+s o ns+ o r «o r + roe+ or +soo n +a+so+ ·

33.   SS  (33):  Waqf            ~                                                                                                                                                               .

34.  5SS   (34):  Hiring of Persons .........................a.s.as.....................·
35.   SS  (35):  Zakah                                                                                       ..
36.   SS  (36):  Impact of Contingent  Incidents  on Commitments................
37,   SS  (37):  Credit Agreement  .......o»so»sos»sos«sou»sos»so»so»a+

38.   SS  (38):  Online Financial  Dealings.....arm»moo.ammo..

39.   SS  (39):  Mortgage and its Contemporary Applications.....................
40.  SS  (40):  Distribution   of  Profit   in  Mudarabah-Based    Investment
Accounts      ,.                                                                                           m••········..·······•··· ..·•..·····
41.  SS  (4l)  Islamic Reinsurance..........sssssssssssssssssssssssosssssssssssosssssssss·
42.  SS (42):  Financial   Rights and  How  They Are Exercised and Trans-
fined   ._...............................                                           "'"....


44.  SS  (44):  Obtaining  and  Deploying Liquidity..........coo.a.a.a.a.........
45.  SS  (45):  Protection  of Capital and Investments .....................a...............
46.  SS  (46):  Al-Wakalah Bi  Al-lstithmar  (Investment  Agency).................

47.  SS  (47):  Rules for Calculating  Profit  in Financial Transactions        .
48.  SS   (48):  Options  to Terminate  Due to Breach of Trust  (Trust-Based
555
583
605

629

647

673

701
719

733

753

767
789

809

839
865
905

921

943
963

989
1013



1061

1083
1097

1115

1133
Options i                  i                     ,.. •••• ,.,                           ii·•··""i"r.•l-•• ..·i••••+••r.•• ..·••  ·•·          .,................           1145
49.  SS  (49):  Unilateral  and Bilateral Promise...........ass...a.a.a.a......a......      1159




16





Ta ble  of Contents


50. SS (50):  Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat)...............................................      1175
51. SS (51):  Options to Revoke Contracts Due to Incomplete Performance..      1197
52. S$ (52):  Options O Reconsider (Cooling-Off Options, Either-Or Options,
and Options to Revoke Due to Non-Payment)................a..a.........      1213
53. SS (53):  'Arboun (Earnest Money)............................................................      1231

54. SS (54):  Revocation of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option..      1245

Overview: Publication  Sponsor............................................................       1259














































17































Introduction












Introduction


The Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial Insti• tutions (AAOIFI),  formerly known as Financial Accounting  Organization for Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions, was established  in accordance with the Agreement of Association which was signed  by Islamic  financial institutions on 1  Safar  1410 A.H.,  corresponding to 26 February 1990 A.D., in Algiers.  AAOIFI was registered  on 11  Ramadan 1411  A.H., corresponding to  27 March 1991  A.D., in the Kingdom of Bahrain as an international auton• omous non-profit  making corporate body:.

Objectives of AAOIFI are:
1.   To develop accounting  and auditing thoughts  relevant to Islamic financial  institutions;
2  To disseminate   accounting and auditing thoughts relevant  to Islamic financial institutions  am their applications through training,  seminars, publication   of periodical  newsletters,  carrying out and commissioning of research  and other means;
3.   To prepare, promulgate and interpret accounting and auditing standards for Islamic financial institutions;  and
4.  To review and amend accounting and auditing standards for Islamic financial institutions.
AAOIFI carries  out these objectives  in accordance with the precepts of Islamic  Shari'ah  which represents  a comprehensive  system  for all aspects of life, in conformity with the environment in which Islamic financial institutions have  developed.  This  activity is  intended   both to enhance the confidence of users  of the  financial statements of Islamic  fi nancial  institutions  in the information that is  produced about these institutions, and to encourage these users  to invest  or deposit their funds in Islamic  financial institutions  and to use their services.
Before the establishment of AAOIFI, intensive efforts were made on both administrative  and technical levels  beginning with the working paper that



21





Introduction

was presented by the Islamic Development Bank during the annual meeting of its board of governors in Istanbul in March 1987.  Thereafter, a number  of committees were formed to examine the appropriate  methods  of preparing accounting  standards  for  Islamic financial  institutions.  These committees produced  several research studies and reports.

Since   its  establishment  in  1411  A.H.,  corresponding  to  1991  A.D.  and until 1415 A.H., corresponding  to 1995 A.D., the organizational structure of AAOIFI comprised the Supervisory  Committee which consisted of seventeen members,  the  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  which  consisted  of twenty one members,  an Executive Committee  appointed  from within  the members of the Standards  Board,  and a Shari'ah  Committee of four  members.

After four years of work,  the Supervisory  Committee  decided  to form a review committee to look into the statute Of AAOIFI and its organizational structure. The amendments that were later introduced  in the statute, which were approved  by the Supervisory  Committee,  included  the  renaming  of the  Organization   and  the  changing  of its  organizational   structure.  The revised  structure  consisted  of a  General  Assembly, a  Board  of Trustees (which replaced the supervisory  committee), an Accounting  and Auditing Standards  Board  (which  replaced  the former  board  that was confined  to accounting   standards  only),  an  Executive  Committee,  a  Shari'ah  Board and a General Secretariat  to be headed by a Secretary-General.

The  amendment   of the  statute  also included  changing  the method  of financing  AAOIFI.  In  the  past,  AAOIFI  was  financed  by  contributions paid by the founding  members  (Islamic Development  Bank,  Dar Al-Maal Al-Islami  Group,  Al  Rajhi  Banking  & Investment  Corporation,  Dallah Al Baraka  and  Kuwait  Finance  House).  The  revised  statute  calls for the establishment  of a Waqf (endowment)  and charity fund to be financed from membership  fee that is paid only once by institutions  joining AAOIFI. The proceeds  from  this fund,  the annual  subscription  fees,  grants,  donations,
bequests and others are the sources  from which  AAOIFI funds its activities.

(I)  These studies  and reports are compiled infive volumes and were lodged  in the library of the Islamic  Research and Training Institute  of the Islamic  Development   Bank in Jeddah  - Saudi  Arabia   under serial  no.  (332/121021).



2





Introd uction

The amendment ct the statute  also included  changing  the membership
Of AAOIFI. It consisted  of:

■  Founding  members,
Non-founding members,
■  Observing  members.

Attached  is  an updated  list of AAOIFI's members.

In  1419  A.H.,  corresponding to  1998 A.D.,  additional amendments were  made   in AAOIFI's   statute.  These  amendments  included,  among other things,  the  broadening Of AAOIFIs objectives. Article (4)  of the amended statute  states  that  AAOIFI  shall:
1.    Develop  the  accounting,  auditing  and  banking   practices  thought relating  to the activities  of Islamic financial  institutions.
2   Disseminate  the  accounting and  auditing   thought  relating to  the activities   of  Islamic   financial  institutions  and  their   applications through  training,  seminars,  publication  of periodical  newsletters, preparation of research  and other  means.
3.   Prepare, promulgate  and interpret  accounting  and auditing  standards for Islamic financial institutions in order to harmonize  the accounting practices  adopted  by  these  institutions  in  the  preparation  of their financial statements, as well as to harmonize  the auditing  procedures adopted   in  auditing   the  financial  statements   prepared   by  Islamic financial  institutions.
4.   Review and amend  the accounting  and auditing standards for Islamic fi nancial institutions to  cope  with  developments  in the  accounting and auditing  thought  and practices.
5.  Prepare, issue, review and adjust the statements  and guidelines  on the banking,  investment  and insurance  practices  ct the Islamic financial institutions.
6.  Approach  the concerned  regulatory  bodies,  Islamic financial  institu• tions, other  financial  institutions that offer Islamic financial  services, and accounting and auditing firms in order to implement  the accoun• ting and auditing standards, as well as the statements and guidelines on the  banking,  investment  and insurance  practices  ct Islamic financial
institutions  that are published by AAOIFI.



23





Introd uction

The amendments  also included the renaming ct non-founding members to be "Associate Members".  Article  (3)  of the amended  statute  states that associate members shall comprise the following:
1.   Islamic financial  institutions  that comply with Islamic Shari'ah  rules
and principles  in all their transactions.
2.   Regulatory and supervisory authorities  that supervise Islamic financial institutions.  Regulatory and  supervisory  authorities  include  central banks,  monetary agencies and other similar  authorities.
3.   Islamic Fiqh academies and authorities  that have corporate  entity. The Observing  Members  shall comprise the following:
1.   Organizations and associations responsible for regulating the accoun•
ting and auditing  profossion  and/or  those  responsible  for preparing accounting  and auditing  standards.
2.   Practicing certified accounting and auditing firms that have interest in the accounting and auditing practices of Islamic financial  institutions.
3.   Financial institutions  engaged in fi nancial activities of Islamic insti•
tutions.
4.  Users of financial  statements  of Islamic fl nancial institutions  both individual  and corporate.
The conditions  of membership   specified in Article (8)  of the amended statute stipulate that every member  should pay the prescribed  membership fe  and the  annual  subscription   fee  A member  should  also comply with AAOIFTs  statute and bylaws.

The amendment of the statute also included  the formation  of a Shari'ah Board  instead  of Shari'ah  Committee.  Details  of the  Shari'ah  Board  are shown below in the organizational  structure.

In  1425  A.H, corresponding  to 2004 A.D., additional  amendments  were made  in AAOIFTs  statute.  These  amendments included   expanding   the membership  category to include supporting members,  which comprise users of financial statements of Islamic financial institutions both individuals and corporate. It also comprises all the local and international financial institutions that already have or intend  to have relations with Islamic financial institutions' products.





Introd uction

The changes also include AAOIFI ability to offer a testing and certification programme  in the  areas of accounting,  auditing,  financial  analysis,  and Islamic banking,  conducted  either by AAOIFI or in cooperation  with other parties.



















































25





Introd uction





Organizational  Structure


a)  General  Secretariat

The General Secretariat consists of the Secretary-General and the technical and administrative units.  The Secretary-General  is the executive  director Of  AAOIFI.   He  coordinates  the  activities   of  General   Assembly,  the Board  of Trustees, the  Standards  Board,  Shari'ah  Board,  the  Executive Committee  and  the  subcommittees  and  acts  as  their   rapporteur.  He runs  the  day-to-day  affairs  and  activities  as  well as coordinating  and supervising the studies related to the preparation of statements, standards and guidelines  promulgated by AAOIFI.  The responsibilities of the Secretary-General also include  strengthening ties between  AAOIFI  and other  organizations and  representing AAOIFI  at conferences, seminars and scientific  meetings.

b)  Board  of Trustees

The  Board  of Trustees  is  composed  of nineteen  part-time  members, in addition  to  the Secretary  General,  who  are appointed  by:  the  General Assembly for a five-year term.  Members  of the Board  of Trustees represent the   following  various   categories:   regulatory  and   supervisory  bodies, Islamic  fl nancial institutions,  Shari'ah   Supervisory  Boards,  organizations and associations  responsible  for regulating  the accounting  prof ession  and/ or responsible  for preparing  accounting  and  auditing  standards, certified accountants,  and  users  of the  financial  statements  of  Islamic  financial institutions.  The  conditions   of electing  these  members   are  specified  in Article (11) of the statute.
The  Board  of Trustees  meets  at least  once a year.  With  the  exception of the proposals  to amend  the statute  of AAOIFI which  requires  the vote of three  quarters  of the  members  of the  Board  of Trustees,  decisions  in all matters  before the Board are adopted  by the majority  of the members voting.  In case of a tie,  the Chairman  shall have the casting vote.



26





Introd uction

The  powers  of the  Board  of Trustees  include,  among  others,  the fol•
lowing:

I.   Appointment of members   Of AAOIFI's  Boards  and  termination  of
their membership,  in accordance  with the provisions  of the statute.
2.   Arrangement of sources  of finance  for  AAOIFI  and investing those resources.
3.   Appointment of two  members from  amongst  the  members of the
Board  of Trustees  to the Executive  Committee.
4.  Appointment of the Secretary-General.

Notwithstanding the provisions  of the statute  concerning   the Board of Trustees'  powers  and authorities,  neither  the Board of Trustees  nor any of its  sub-committees  including  the  Executive  Committee,  has the  right  to interfere  directly or indirectly  in the work of the other  Boards  Of AAOIFI or influence  them  in any manner  whatsoever.
c)  Executive Committee

The Executive Committee  is  composed  of five  members:  The Chairman and one member  from  of the Board cf Trustees, the Secretary General,  the Chairman of the Accounting and Auditing Standards Board and the Chairman of the Shari'ah  Board.  The Executive Committee  has the power to discuss,
among other things,  the work plan,  the annual  budget,  financial statements, and the report af the external auditor.  The Executive Committee  also has the power to approve the employment bylaws and financial regulations of AAOIFI. The Executive Committee  meets at least twice at the request cf the Secretary• General or as and when required at the request of either its Chairman  or the Seer etary-General.
d) General Assembly

The General Assembly is  composed  of all  founding  and associate mem• bers, members representing regulatory and supervisory authorities, observer members and supporting  members.  Observer and supporting  members have the right  to participate in the meetings of the General Assembly but without a right to vote. The General Assembly is  the supreme authority and convenes at least once a year.





Introd uction

e)   Shari'ah  Board
The Shari'ah  Board is composed f not more than twenty members to be appointed  by the Board of Trustees for a four-year term from among Fiqh scholars who represent Shari'ah  Supervisory Boards in the Islamic financial
institutions that are members Of AAOIFI,  and Sharf'ah  supervisory  boards in central banks,  in  addition to the Secretary  General.
The powers of the Shari'ah  Board  include,  among others, the following:

I.  Achieving harmonization and convergence  in the concepts  and ap• plication  among  the Sharf'ah  Supervisory  Boards of Islamic finan• cial  institutions  to  avoid  contradiction  or  inconsistency  between the Fatwas and applications  by these institutions, thereby providing a pro-active  role  for  the  Shari'ah  Supervisory  Boards  of Islamic financial  institutions and central  banks.
2   Helping  in the development of Sharf'ah  approved instruments,  thereby
enabling Islamic  financial  institutions to cope with the developments taking place in instruments and formulas  in fields ct finance,  investment and other banking services.
3.   Examining  any inquiries  ref erred  to the Shari'ah  Board from Islamic
financial  institutions   or  from  their  Shari'ah  Supervisory  Boards, either  to give  the  Shari'ah  opinion  in  matters  requiring  collective ljtihad  (reasoning),  or to settle divergent  points of view,  or to act as an arbitrator.
4.   Reviewing the standards which AAOIFI issues  in accounting,  auditing
and code ct ethics  and related  statements throughout the various  stages ct the due process, to ensure that these issues  are  in compliance with the rules and principles oflslamic  Shari'.ah.
f) Accounting  and Auditing  Standards Board
The  Standards  Board is  composed  of twenty  part-time  members  who are appointed  by the Board  of Trustees for  a four-year  term,  in addition to  the Secretary  General.  Members  of the Standards  Board  represent  the following various  categories:  Regulatory  and supervisory  bodies,  Islamic
financial  institutions,  Shari'ah  Supervisory  Boards,  university  prof essors, organizations  and  associations  responsible  for  regulating  the accounting



28





Introd uction

profession and/or  responsible  for preparing accounting and auditing standards,  certified  accountants,  and users  of the financial  statements of Islamic financial  institutions.
The powers of the Standards  Board include,  among others, the following:

1.   To prepare,  adopt and interpret  accounting  and auditing statements, standards and guidelines for Islamic financial institutions.
2.   To prepare and adopt code of ethics and educational standards  related to the activities of Islamic financial institutions.
3.   'To review with the aim of making additions, deletions or amendments
to any accounting  and auditing statements, standards  and guidelines.
4.   To prepare and adopt the due process fa- the preparation  of standards, as well  as regulations and bylaws of the Standards  Board.
The Standards Board meets it least  twice every year and its resolutions are adopted by the majority of the votes of the members voting. In case of a tie, the Chairman ct the Standards  Board  shall have the casting vote.
































29




Introduction



Board of Trustees
NAME             POSITION                   STATUS H.E  Shaikh Ebrahim Bin  Khalifa    Former  Minister of Housing,     Chairman
Al Khalifa                                       Kingdom of Bahrain
H. E. Sheikh   Saleh  Abdullah           President,  Dallah  Al Baraka             Deputy

Kamel
Group,  Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia

Chairman
Tan  Sri  Dr.  Munir Majid                    Chairman, Bank Muamalat,         Member
Malaysia
,-
Mr. Ahmed al Gebali                      Director, Islamic                           Member
Development Bank
Mr.  Shadi Zahran                             Group Chief Financial  Officer,     Member
- Kuwait Finance  House
H.  E Muliaman  D Hadad              rChairman, Fi...nancial Services       Member
Authority of Indonesia
Executive Director, Banking
Mr.  Khalid Hamad                          Supervision,  Central Bank of       Member
Bahrain
Mr.  Saeed Ahmed                            Deputy Governor, State Bank     Member of Pakistan
Mr.  Abdulmohsen  Abdulaziz Al-     Chief Executive Officer,
Fares                                                        Alinma Bank, Kingdom of          Member
Saudi Arabia
Chief Executive  Officer, Abu
Mr.  Tirad M. Mahmoud                  Dhabi Islamic  Bank,  United          Member
Arab Emirates
Mr.  Abdulbasit Ahmed A  Al-            Chief Executive Officer, Qatar
Shaibei                                                  International  Islamic  Bank,           Member
Qatar
President  & Chief Executive
Mr. Irfan Siddiqui                            Officer, Meezan Bank,                   Member
Pakistan
Head of Islamic Banking
Mr.  Abdulrazak Mohammed           Development Group,  National    Member
Elkhraijy                                             Commercial Bank,  Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia





30





Introd uction


Sh.  Dr. Sayyed Mohammad Al•        Shari'ah  Scholar,  Kuwait               Member
Sayyid Abdul Razzaq Al- Tabtaba'e
Sh.  Yousif Khalawi                          Shari'ah Scholar, Kingdom of      Member
Saudi Arabia
-                                                  -
Former Managing Partner,
Mr. Noor ur Rahman Abid              Auditing and Assurance                  Member
Business Services, Middle East,
EY, Kingdom  of Bahrain
Chairman, Maayer
Consulting and Auditing,

Mr.  Ahmad Fayez Al Shamsi            United Arab Emirates {and           Member former Chief Financial
Officer,  Emirates Islamic
Bank)
-
Member of the Board, Central
Bank of the Republic of
Prof.  Dr.  Necdet Sensoy                    Turkey (and former Professor       Member
of Accounting in Universities
- in Malaysia and Turkey)
Dr.  Hamed Hassan Merah              Secretary General, AAOIFI         Member &
Rapporteur



Secretary-General


Dr.  Hamed Hassan Merah





















31




Introduction



Shari'ah Board

NAME                                     POSITION                          STATUS Vice-President Darul-Uloom Karachi,
Sheikh Muhammad Taqi     Pakistan, and Permanent Member,           Chairman
Usmani                              OIC  Fiqh Academy, Jeddah,  Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia
-                                         --              -
Sheikh Abdulla Bin             Member,  Council of Senior Scholars,          Deputy
Sulaiman  Al Manea           and Advisor to the Royal Court,              Chairman
-  -Kingdom  of Saudi  Arabia                 -
President and General Secretary of the
Sheikh  Dr.  Abdul Sattar      Unified Shari'ah  Board  of Al Baraka           Member
AbuGhuddah                     Banking Group,  Kingdom of Saudi
..A...rabia
International Expert and Advisor,
Sheikh  Dr.  Hussein              Chairman and Member of IFIs' Shari'ah        Member
Hamid Hassan                   Supervisory Boards, Arab  Republic  of
Egypt

Member,  Council of Senior Scholars,
Sheikh Abdulla Bin             and Member,  Permanent Committee            Member
Mohamed Al Mutlaq         of Ifta, and Advisor to the Royal  Court,
Kingdom  of Saudi Arabia

Sheikh  Dr.  Ahmad Ali         Secretary General, The Higher
Abdulla                                 Council of the Shari'ah  Supervisory           Member
-B-o-ard,  Sudan                                      -
Chairman  and Member,  IFIs'  Shari'ah
Sheikh Nizam Yaquby         Supervisory  Boards,  Kingdom of              Member
Bahrain
a
Sheikh Dr.  Mohamed Ali    Chairman and Member,  IFIs' Shari'ah        Member
Al Qari                                   Supervisory  Boards, Saudi  Arabia
-                    -
Sheikh Dr. Yousef                 Chairman and Member,  IFI's  Shari'ah
Abdullah AI-Shubaily       Supervisory Board, Bank Albilad,            Member
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia





32





Introduction


Senior  Mufti, Supreme  Committee of Sheikh  Dr. Ahmed  Bin         Iftaa, DLrector,  Dar Al Iftaa, Department Abdulaziz  Al Hadad            of Islamic  Affairs and Charitable
Activities United Arab Emirates

Sheikh  Dr. Mahmoud Al    Chairman,  Shari'ah  Supervisory
Sartawi                                   Board,  Jordan  Islamic Bank, Jordan

Sheikh Dr. Ayashi                Shari'ah  Advisor,  Islamic Development
Faddad                                   Bank


Member




Member


Member

Sheikh  Dr.  Esam 'Anezi       Chairman,  Shari'ah  Supervisory                  Member
Board,  Investment  Dar, Kuwait.

Sheikh Dr.  Mohammed      Executive Director,  The International
Shari'ah  Research  Academy for Islamic      Member
Akram Laldin
Finance,


Sheikh  Waleed  Bin  Hadi
Head of Shari'ah  Compliance,  Qatar
Islamic Bank,  Qatar

Member


Sheikh Aflah Alkahalili
Head of Studies and Research,  Grand
Mufti Office, Sultanate  of Oman

Member

Mr.  Abdulla  Bin                      Member,  Ulama Society,  Yemen                   Member
Humood  Al Ezzi

Sheikh  Mohsen  Al               Member,  Shari'ah  Supervisory  Board,        Member
Asfoor                                    Ithmaar  Bank,  Kingdom af Bahrain

Dr.  Hamed  Hassan               Secretary -General,  AAOIFI                        Member&
Merah                                                                                                           Rapporteur


















33





Introd uction



Former Shariah Board Members

Sheikh  Prof.  Dr.  Wahbe Mustafa al
Zuhaili

Sheikh Abdul  Razzaq Naser
Mohammed

Sheikh  Prof.  Dr. Nazih  Hammad


Sheikh  Ghazali Bin  Abdul Rahman

Sheikh Yousif Mohammed  Mahmoud    Sheikh  Dr. Abdul Rahman  Bin Saleh Al
Qasi.m                                                          Atram

Sheikh  Dato Hajj Mohammed
Hashim  Bin Yehia


Sheikh YusufTalal  De Lorenzo


Sheikh  Dr.  Mohammad  Daud Baler
Sheikh  Prof.  Dr.  Alsidiq Mohammed  Al
Dharir

Sheikh  Prof.  Dr.  Ali Mohi Eldinne
Alqoradaghi


Sheikh  Mohammed  Ali Taskhiri


Sheikh  Dr.  Mohammed  Abdul Rahim
Sultan  Al Ulama

Sheikh  Dr.  Saleh  Bin  Abdulla
Lihaidan

Sheikh  Prof.  Dr. Ajeel  Jasim  Al-Nashmi

























34





Introd uction



Shariah Standards Review Committee
NAME            POSITION               I STATU5
President and General
Secretary of the Unified
Sheikh Dr. Abdul  Sattar Abu
Ghuddah




Sheikh  Dr.  Ayashi  Faddad

Shari'ah  Board of Al Baraka Banking Group,  Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
TShari'ah  Advisor,  Islamic
]Development Bank, Saudi
Arabia
[sad «sart»h  comic,]

Member





Member
Sheikh Waleed  Bin Hadi


Sheikh  Dr. Yousef Abdullah Al•
I Qatar Islamic Bank, oatar        [    Member

Member,  Shari'ah Supervisory

Shu baily
Board,  Bank Albilad, Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia
Member
--~11----


Sheikh  Dr. Esam 'Anezi



Dr.  Hamed Hassan Merah
Chairman, Shari'ah
Supervisory Board,  In vestment
Dar,  Kuwait.

Secretary-General,  AAOIFI


Member



Member























35





Introduction



Shari'ah Standards Drafting Committee


NAME                                      POSITION                        STATUS

President and General Secretary of the
Sheikh Dr. Abdul Sattar        Unified Shari'ah Board of Al Baraka      Member
AbuGhuddah                      Banking Group,  Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia

Sheikh Dr.  Mohamed Ali     Chairman and Member of IF Is'
Al Qari                                  Shari'ah Supervisory Boards,                    Member
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

Sheikh Dr. Yousef                Member,  Shari'ah Supervisory Board,
Abdullah AI-Shubaily            Bank Albilad,  Kingdom of Saudi               Member
Arabia



































36





Introd uction



Shari'ah Standards Translation Committee
NAME             POSITION               I STATU5

Vice-President, Darul-Uloom       []
Sheikh Muhammad Taqi
Karachi,  Pakistan, and Permanent   Ch:
Usmani
Member, OIC F.qh  Academy,
arman
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia               -1   ---

Sheikh  Nizam Yaquby



Sheikh  Dr.  Mohamed Ali Al
Qari


Sheikh Essam Mohammed
Ishaq
Chairman and Member of IFIs'
Shari'ah  Supervisory  Boards,
Kingdom of Bahrain

Chairman and Member of IFis' Shari'ah Supervisory Boards, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
--+--
Shari'ah Advisor & Board
Member, Discover Islam  Centre,
Kingdom of Bahrain.

Executive  Director,  The

Member



Member




Member
l
Sheikh  Dr.  Mohammed Akram International  Shari'ah  Research
Laldin                                               Academy for Islamic  Finance,
Member
I

























37





Introduction



Shari'ah Standards Committee  (1)
Kuwait


NAME            POSITION                       STATUS


Sheikh  Dr. Esam 'Anezi
Chairman,  Shari'ah  Supervisory
Board,  Investment  Dar,  Kuwait

Chairman

Sheikh  Dr. Muhammad  Anas   Senior  Advisor,  Shura  Shari'ah
Al Zarka                                       Consultancy

Director,  Sharl'ah  Compliance

Member
Dr.  Mohammed  Awd Ali
Alfezee


Dr.  Ali Ebrahim  Al Rashid
-
Sheikh Abdul Sattar al
Qattan


Dr.  Abdul Aziz Al Qassar


Dr.  Hamed  Hassan Merah


Dr.  Abdul  Rahman  Abdulla
Al Saadi

Department,  Alimtiaz Investment,
-Kuwait
Shari'ah  Consultant,  Al Raya
Consulting  and Training,  Kuwait

General Manager,  Shura  Shari'ah
Conslutancy,  Kuwait

Professor, College of Shari'ah, University  of Kuwait,  Kuwait


Secretary  General, AAOIFI


Advisor,  AAOIFI

Member
Member Member Member Member Rapporteur


















38





Introd uction



Shari'ah Standards Committee  (2)
Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia


NAME            POSITION                 ]sr»rs

[  Shari'ah  Advisor, Islamic
Sheikh  Dr. Ayashi Faddad         Development  Bank, Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia

Chairman  and Member of IFIs' Sheikh  Dr.  Mohamed  Ali Al    Shari'ah  Supervisory  Boards,

Chairman



Member
Qari


Sheikh  Dr. Yousef Abdullah
AJ-Shubaily



Dr. Mosa Adam  Essa

-------~--

Dr.  Sami Al-Suwailem



Dr.  Abdulla al Omrani




Dr.  Adel Qouteh
Kingdom  of Saudi  Arabia

Member, Shari'ah Supervisory Board,  Bank Albilad, Kingdom of Saudi  Arabia

Head of Shari'ah  Compliance, National Commercial  Bank, Kingdom  of Saudi  Arabia

Head,  Financial  Product
Development  Centre

Faculty Member,  College of Shari'ah,  Al-Imam  Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic  University, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

King Abdul Aziz  University, Jeddah,  Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia




Member



Member



Member




Member




Member

Dr.  Hamed  Hassan Merah


Dr.  Abdul Rahman  Abdulla
Al Saadi
Secretary  General,  AAOIFI


Advisor,  AAOIFI
Member
--
Rapporteur









39





Introduction



Shari'ah Standards Committee  (3)
Dubai, United Arab Emirates


NAME                                 POSITION                  STATUS


President  and General Secretary
Sheikh  Dr. Abdul Sattar Abu       of the Unified Shari'ah  Board             Chairman
Ghuddah                                          of Al Baraka Banking  Group,
Kingdom  of Saudi  Arabia
Dr. Osaid Mohammed  Adeeb     Head ofShari'ah  at Abu Dhabi

Kilani                                              Islamic Bank
Member


Dr.  M. Imran  Usmani
Resident Shari'ah  Board Member, Meezan Bank, Pakistan

Secretary General,  International

Member
Dr.  Abdul  Sattar  Khuwaylidi       Islamic Center  for Reconciliation       Member and Arbitration,  United Arab
-E-mirates
Dr.  Amin Fatih                              -Advisory,  United  Arab Emirates         Member
Chairman  and Member  of[Fis'
Sheikh Nizam  Yaquby                  Shari'ah  Supervisory  Boards,               Member
Kingdom  of Bahrain

Sheikh Yusuf Tahal  De  Lorenzo   Chief Shari'ah  Officer, Shari'ah            Member
--          Capital,  United States
Dr.
Hamed  Hassan Merah            Secretary  General,  AAOIFI                  Member


Dr.  Abdul Rahman  Abdulla Al   Advisor,  AAOIFI                                 Rapporteur
Saadi










40





Introduction



Shari'ah Standards Committee  (4)
Karachi, Pakistan


NAME             POSITION                     STATUS

Vice-President,  Darul-Uloom
Sheikh Muhammad  Taqi      Karachi,  Pakistan,  and Permanent            Chairman
Usmani                                     Member,  OIC Fiqh  Academy,
Kingdom of Saudi  Arabia

Dr.  M. Imran  Usmani            Resident  Shari'ah  Board  Member,              Member
Meezan Bank,  Pakistan

Resident Shari'ah  Board  Member,
Mufti.  M. Hassan Kaleem      Dubai  Islamic  Bank Pakistan  Limited,      Member and Shari'ah  Advisor,  Deloitte
-
Chairman,  Shari'ah  Supervisory
Mufti.  Irshad  Ahmad  Aijaz
Board,  Bank Islami  Pakistan
Member

Dr.  Khalil  Ahmed  Azami      Shan'ah  Advisor,  Al Falah  Bank              Member
Limited,  Pakistan
-
Darul-Uloom  Karachi, Member of
Dr.  Mohammed  Zubair Al
Usmani

Shan'ah  Board,  Habib  Bank Limited,        Member
-Pakistan
Mufti.  Abdullah  Najeeb U   Resident  Shari'ah  Board Member,
Haq Siddi qui
Al Baraka Bank (Pakistan) Limited,          Member
Pakistan
-    -~                                             -

Dr.  Hamed  Hassan Merah    Secretary  General,  AAOIFI                        Member















41





Introd uction



Accounting  and Auditing  Standards Board


NAME                               POSITION                           STATUS


Mr.  Hamad  Abdulla
Senior  Vice President,  Head of          Chairman  of
Eqab                               Financial  Control,  Al Baraka               Accounting  and
Banking  Group,  Kingdom  of        Auditing Standards
Bahrain.                                                           Board            -
Chairman  of
Mr. Jalil Al-Aali                 Partner,  KPMG Fakhro,                           Accounting
Kingdom of Bahrain                                  Standards
Committee
-
Head,  Central  Accounting                     Chairman  of

Mr.  Jamil  Darras

Section,  Finance Department, Islamic Development  Bank, Kingdom of Saudi  Arabia.
Auditing and
Governance
Standards
Committee
-
President  and General Secretary Sheikh  Dr.  Abdul             of the Unified Shari'ah  Board Sattar Abu Ghuddah         of AI Baraka Banking  Group,
Kingdom of Saudi  Arabia

Shari'ah Advisor & Board


Member
Sheikh  Essam
Mohammedishaq
Member,  Discover Islam  Centre, Kingdom of Bahrain.

Accounting  Department,  Banque

Member
-
Mr.  Firas S  Hamdan
du Liban (Central  Bank of                        Member
- Lebanon),  Lebanon.                   --
Dr.  Hussein Said Saifan  Assistant General Manager,                       Member
Jordan  Islamic  Ban-k,  J-ordan     - -
Dr.  Nordin                         Deloitte Kassimchan,  Malaysia                  Member
Mohammed  Zain                                                                                             -
Partner,  EY, Kingdom of
Mr.  Fawad Laique
Bahrain.
Member







42





Introd uction



M r.  Oliver  Agba


Mr. Qudeer  Latif
Managing  Partner,  Agha & Co
United  Arab Emirates
i
Partner,  Clifford Chance  LLP, Dubai,  United  Arab Emirates.

Member


Member


Mr. Mohamed  Said El
Saka


Dr. Hamed  Hassan
Merah

General Manager,  Financial Control  and Planning Department,  Kuwait International Bank, Kuwait

Secretary-General,  AAOIFI
--+--




_,_



Member



Member  & Rapporteur









































43





Introd uction



Accounting  Standards Committee


NAME                                  POSITION                      STATUS


Mr. Jalil Al-Aali               Partner,  KPMG Fakhro,  Kingdom of
Bahrain

Accounting  Department,  Banque  du
lcaran

-------<,
Mr. Firas S  Hamdan



Mr.  Fawad Laique
Liban (Central  Bank of Lebanon),
Lebanon.

Partner,  EY  & Young, Kingdom  of
Member



Mr.  Imtiaz Ibrahim


Mr. Aly Fl  Azhary
Mr.Mahesh                J
Balasubramaniam
Bahrain.                                                              Member
Partner,  EY, Qatar                       ---1 Member
Deloitte  & Touch Bakr Albulkhair  & Co.,     M     b
Kingdom of Saudi  Arabia                                    em  er

Partner,  KPMG Fakhro,  Kingdom of          Member
Bahrain


Mr.  Madhukar  Shenoy       Partner,  PwC, Kingdom of Bahrain
Member


Mr.  Irshad  Mahmood
Director,  PwC, Kingdom of Bahrain
Member

Vice  Chairman  & Chief Executive
Mr.  Issam  Z Al-Tawari    I  Officer,  Rasameel Structured  Finance
Co.,  Kuwait.


Member

Dr.  Hamed  Hassan
Merah

Secretary-General,  AAOIFI
I         Member












44





Introd uction



Auditing  and Governance Standards Committee
NAME            POSITION                     I STATUS

]Head,  Central  Accounting Section,
Mr. Jamil Darras



Sheikh  Essam
Mohammed Ishaq
Finance  Department,  Islamic Development Bank, Kingdom  of Saudi Arabia.

Shari'ah  Advisor  & Board  Member, Discover  Islam  Centre,  Kingdom  of Bahrain.
Islamic  Bank,  Jordan                             rl

Chairman




Member



Member
Dr.  Hussein  Said Saifan   I Assistant  General  Manager,  Jordan      -



Mr.  Oliver Agha
r Managing  Partner,  Agha & Co,  United
Arab Emirates

Member

Mr Qudeer  Lat      leaner,  Citvord  Chance  LLP Data,, [
United  Arab Emirates.

Member


Dr. Hatim  El-Tahir             Director,  Deloitte,  Kingdom  of Bahrain        Member


Dr.  Hamed  Hassan
Merah                                   Secretary-General,  AAOIFI                             Member






















45


























Shari'ah  Standard No. (1)



'Trading in Currencies












Contents


Subject                                                                                        Page
Pref: ilce...................................................................................................       51
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................          52
].  Scope  of  the Standard ......coo«rooms+so«ors»»roses»so»no»room                             5l
2.  Shari'ah  Ruling on Trading  in Currencies......................................          52
3.  Date of Issuance  af the Standard............................................................          58
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................          59
Appendix  (a)   Brief History of  the Preparation of the Standard.............          60
Appendix (b):  Ihe Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard..........so.so.........          62

































49








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE  ALL-MERCIFUL,  THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all his companions





Preface


The purpose  of this standard  is to explain  the Shari'ah rulings relating to trading  in currencies,  as well as the conditions  and precepts  laid  down  by the Shari'ah  as to what is  permissible  in currency trading  and what is  not. The  standard also explains some  of the practices  being applied by Islamic financial Institutions.("






























(1) The  word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



51





Sh ari'ah Standard  No.  (1):  Trading  in  Currencies





Statement of the Standard


1.  Scope  of the Standard

This standard  covers  issues  of both  actual  and  constructive  possession of currencies,  the use of modern  means of communication  in currency trading,  exchange of currencies  in the context of the bilateral settlement of debts owed by the parties  to the exchange,  dealing in currencies  in money markets,  bilateral  promises   to  buy and sell  currencies,  deferment  of the delivery of one afi two countervalues in currency trading, and some cases practised by the Institutions.

The standard  does  not cover the following cases:  those where there are no trading  in currencies; the effect of goldsmithery in selling gold and silver;  transfirs  of debts that do not involve  exchanges of currency;  and the discounting  of bills of exchange.
2. Shari'ah  Ruling on Trading  in Currencies

2/1   It is permissible to trade  in currencies,  provided  that  it is done  in compliance  with  the following  Shari'ah  rules and precepts:

2/1/1  Both parties  must take possession of the countervalues  before dispersing,  such possession being either actual or constructive.

2/1/2 The  countervalues   of the  same  currency  must  be of equal amount,  even if one of them  is  in paper money and the other is  in  coin  of the same country,  like a note of one pound  for a coin  of one pound.
2/1/3  The contract shall  not contain any conditional option or def r•
ment clause regarding the delivery of one or both countervalues.

2/1/4 The dealing in currencies  shall  not aim at establishing  a mo• nopoly position,  nor should it entail any evil consequences  to the interest of individuals  or societies.



52





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (1):  Trading  in  Currencies

2/1/5  Currency transactions shall not be carried  out on the forward or futures market.

2/2  It is prohibited to enter  into  forward  currency contracts.  This  rule applies  whether  such contracts  are effected  through  the exchange of deferred transfers of debt or through the execution of a deferred contract in which  the  concurrent   possession  of both of the countervalues  by both parties does not take place.

2/3  It is also prohibited to deal  in the forward currency market even if the purpose  is hedging to avoid a loss of profit on a particular  transaction effected in a currency  whose value  is  expected to decline.
2/4  I is  permissible for the Institution to hedge  against  the future de•
valuation of the currency by recourse to the following:

2/4/1  To execute back to back interest free loans using different  cur• rencies without  receiving  or giving any extra benefit, provided these  two loans  are not contractually connected to each other.

2/4/2 Where  the  exposure  is in  respect  of an  account   payable,  to sell goods  on credit  or by Murabahah in the currency of the exposure.
2/5  It is  permissible  for the Institution and the customer to agree,  at the time of settlement of the instalments of a credit  transaction (such  as a Murabahah), that  the payment shall be made  in another currency applying  the spot exchange  rate on the day of payment.
2/6  Possession in sales ct currencies

2/6/1 When   a contract is  concluded for the  sale of an amount  of currency,  possession  must  be taken  for  the  whole  amount that is the subject  matter  of the contract at the closing  of the transaction.
2/6/2 Taking  possession   of one  of the  countervalues  by one  party without  taking  possession  of the other  is not  enough  to make a currency dealing  transaction  permissible.  Likewise,  taking partial possession   is  not  sufficient.  Taking possession  of part



53





Shari'ah Standard No.  (1):  Trading in  Currencies

of a countervalue   is valid only in respect  of the part,  posses• sion  of which  is  complete, whereas  the  remaining  part of the transaction  remains invalid.

2/6/3 Possession  may take  place either physically  or constructively.
The  form  of taking  possession  of assets differs  according  to
their nature  and customary  business practices.

2/6/4 Physical  possession   takes  place  by  means  of  simultaneous delivery by hand.

2/6/5 Constructive   possession  of an asset is  deemed  to have  taken place by the seller enabling  the other  party to take  its  delivery and dispose of it,  even if there is  no physical taking of posses• sion.  Among  other  forms  of constructive  possession  that  are
approved  by both  Shari'ah  and  business  customary  practices
are the following:

a) To credit a sum of money to the account of the customer in the following situations:
1.  When the Institution  deposits to the credit of a customer's account a sum of money directly or through a bank transfer.
2.  When the customer enters into a spot contract of currency exchange between himself and the Institution,  in the case of the  purchase  of a currency  against  another  currency already  deposited  in the account of the customer.
3.  When the Institution debits - by the order of the customer
- a sum of money to the  latter's  account and credits  it to another account in a different currency,  either in the same Institution  or  another  Institution,  for  the  benefit  of the customer or any other payee. In following such a procedure, the Institution  shall  adhere  to the principles of Islamic law regarding currency exchange.

A delay in  making  the transfer  is  allowed to the  Institution, consistent with  the practice whereby a payee may obtain actual receipt according  to prevailing business practices in currency



54





Shari'ah Standard No (1):  Trading in  Currencies

markets. However, the payee  is not  entitled to dispose  of the currency during  the transfer  period,  unless and until the effect of the bank transfer  has taken effect so that the  payee is able to make an actual delivery of the currency to a third party.
b) Receipt of a cheque constitutes constructive  possession, provid• ed the balance payable is available in the account of the issuer in the currency  of the cheque and the Institution  has blocked such a balance for payment.
c) The receipt  of a voucher  by a merchant,  signed  by the credit card holder  (buyer),  is constructive possession of the amount of currency entered as payable on the coupon provided that the card issuing Institution pays the amount  without  def erment to the merchant accepting  the card.

2/7 Agency in trading in currencies

2/7/]  It is  permissible to appoint an agent  to execute  a contract of sale of a currency with authorisation to take possession  of and deliver  the countervalue.
2/7/2 I is permissible to appoint  an agent to sell currencies without authorizing him to take possession  of the amount  sold, provided the principal or another agent takes possession  at the closing  of the transaction,  before the principal parties are dispersed.

2/7/3  It  is  permissible  to authorise  taking  possession  of the counter• values  after the execution  of a contract of currency exchange, provided such possession  is completed by the authorised agents at the closing of the transaction,  before the principal parties  are dispersed.
2/8  Use of modern means of communication for currency trading

2/8/1 Bilateral  contracting between two parties  at  different remote places   using  modern  communication  means   has the  same juristic consequences as execution of the contract in one and ame place.



55





Sh ari'ah Standard  No.  (1):  Trading  in  Currencies

2/8/2 An offer made for a stated period,  which is transmitted  by one of the prescribed means of communication,  remains  binding on the offeror during that period. The contract is not completed until  acceptance  by the offeree, and taking  possession  of the countervalues  (either  actual or constructive)  by both  parties,
has taken place.

2/9  Bilateral  promise  to purchase and sell currencies

2/9/1  A bilateral promise to purchase  and sell currencies  is  forbidden ifthe promise is binding, even for the purpose of hedging against currency devaluation risk. However,  a promise from one party is permissible even if the promise is  binding.

2/9/2 Parallel  purchase and sale of currencies  is not permissible,  as it
incorporates  one of the following invalidating factors:

a)'There is no delivery and receipt of the two currencies bought and sold,  and thus the contract amounts  to a deforred sale of currency.
b) Making  a contract  of currency  exchange  conditional   on another  contract  of currency  exchange.
c)A  bilateral  promise  that  is  binding  on both  parties to the contract  of currency  exchange,  and this is not permissible.
2/9/3  It is not permissible  for one of the partners in Musharakah  or Mudarabah  to be a guarantor  for the other partner,  to protect the latter  from the risks of dealing in  currencies.  However,  it is permissible  for a third party to volunteer being a guarantor for that purpose, provided  this guarantee  is not stated in the contract.

2/10Exchange of currencies that are debts owed by the parties

An exchange of amounts  denominated  in currencies that are debts established as an obligation on the debtor is permissible,  ifthis results in the settlement of the two debts in place  of a bilateral exchange of currencies,  and in the fulfilment of the obligations in respect of these debts.  This covers the following cases:



56





Shari'ah Standard No (1):  Trading in  Currencies

2/10/1  Discharge  of two  debts  when  one party  owes an  amount from another party denominated  in (say) dinar and the other party  owes an amount  from the first party  denominated  in (say)  dirham.  In  this  context,  both  may  agree on the  rate
ct exchange  between  the  dinar  and  the  dirham   in  order
to  extinguish  the  debts,  wholly  or  partially.   This  type  of
transaction  is  known  as al-Muqassah (set-off).

2/10/2  The  creditor's  making  payment  of a  debt  due  to  him  in a currency diffierent from that in which the debt was incurred, provided  the settlement  is  effected  as a spot transaction  at
the spot exchange rate on the day ct settlement.

2/11 Combination  of currency  exchange and transfer  of money

It is permissible to execute a financial transfer of money (remittances) in a currency different  from that presented by the applicant for the transfer.  This  transaction  consists  of a currency  exchange effected through  actual  or constructive possession  by delivering an amount of currency that is  evidenced by a bank draft, followed by the transfer of the amount  using currency that is  bought by the applicant for the transf r of money. It is  permissible for the Institution  to charge a fe for the transfer.

2/12Forms of dealing  in currencies  via Institutions

2/12/1  Among the forms that are not permitted  is  the customer  of an Institution  entering into currency trading  fer an amount of money exceeding the  amount  of money  he owns,  using credit facilities  granted by the Institution  which handles the currency  trading,  thus enabling the  customer  to enter  into a  transaction  for  an  amount  in  excess of what  he  would otherwise be able  to pay for.

2/12/2  It is  not permitted  for the Institution  to lend  the customer a sum  of money  on  the  condition   that  currency  dealing must  be  effected  with  that  Institution  and  not  with  any other. Ifthere is no such condition,  then there is  no Shari'ah
prohibition.



57





Sh ari'ah Standard  No.  (1):  Trading  in  Currencies

3. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 27 Safar  1421  A.H., corresponding to 31  May
2000A.D.




















































58





Shari'ah Standard No.  (1):  Trading in  Currencies





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Standard on Trading in Currencies was adopted  by the Sharf'ah  Board in  its  meeting  No.  (4)  held on 25-27 Safar  1420  A.H., corresponding  to 29-31  May 2000 A.D.













































59





Shari'ah Standard No.  (1):  Trading in  Currencies





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its  meeting  No.  (1)  held  in Bahrain on Saturday  11   Dhul-Qadah  1419
A.H.,  corresponding  to 27  February  1998 A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Board decided to
give priority to the preparation of a Shari'ah standard on Trading in Currencies.

On Saturday  11  Dhul-Qa'dah   1419  A.H.,  corresponding to 27 February
1999  A.D.,  a Shari'ah  consultant was commissioned  to  prepare  a juristic study and an exposure  draft.
In its meeting held in Bahrain on 13-16 Rabi' I,  1420 A.H., corresponding to 27-30  June  1999  A.D.,  the  Shari'ah  Committee  discussed   the  juristic study  and  made  certain  amendments to it.  The committee  also discussed the exposure draft  of the standard in its meeting  No. (3) held  in Bahrain on 9-1I Rajab  1420 A.H., corresponding to 18-20 October 1999 A.D., and asked the consultant to make some amendments in light of the comments made  by the members.
The revised exposure  draft of the standard  was presented to the Shari'ah Board in its meeting  No.  (2) held in Mecca on  10-15 Ramadan  1420 A.H., corresponding to  18-22  December  1999  A.D.  The  Sharf'ah  Board  made further   amendments to  the  exposure  draft  of the  standard   and  decided
that it should  be distributed to specialists  and interested parties  in order  to
obtain  their comments in order  to discuss them  in a public hearing.

A public hearing was held in Bahrain  on 29-30  Dhul-Hajjah  1421  A.H., corresponding to  4-5  April  2000 A.D.  The  Public  hearing  was attended by more  than  30 participants representing central banks,  Institutions,  ac• counting  firms,  Shari'ah  scholars,  academics  and others who are interested in this field.  Members  of the Shari'ah  Studies Committee responded in the



60





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (1):  Trading  in  Currencies

public  hearing  to  the written  comments  as well as to the  oral comments that were expressed in the public hearing.
The  Sharf'ah   Studies   Committee   held  its  meeting  No.   (5)   on  22-24
Muharram  1421  A.H.,  corresponding to 26-28 April 2000 A.D,  to discuss the  comments  made  about  the  exposure   draft.   The  Committee  made the  necessary  amendments,  which  it deemed  necessary  in light  of both the  discussions   that  took  place  in  the  public  hearing   and  the  written comments  that were received.

The  Shari'ah  Board  in its  meeting  No  (4)  on  25-27  Safar  1421  A.H., corresponding  to 29-31  May 2000 A.D., in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah discussed  the amendments made  by  the Shari'ah Studies Committee,  and
made the necessary amendments, which it deemed necessary. The standard was adopted  by the majority vote of the members  of the Shari'ah Board, as recorded in the minutes of the Shari'ah  Board.


































61





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (1):  Trading in  Currencies





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Available Evidence Pertaining  to the Exchange of Currencies

In the Hadiths of the Prophet,  there are many Hadiths which govern the rules regarding the exchange of currencies.  The best known Hadith is the one reported  on the authority of Ubadah Ibn Al-Samit (may Allah be pleased  with  him)  that the Prophet  (peace  be upon him)  said:  "Gold
for gold,  silver for silver - until  he said  - equal for equal,  like for like,  hand
to  hand,  if the kinds of assets  differ, you may sell them  as you wish provided it is  hand to  hand."G'The other Hadith, reported on the authority of Abu Sa'id  Al-Khudri,  is  that the Prophet  (peace  be upon him)  said:  "Do  not
sell gold fr gold except  equal fr equal and do not sell  what is deferred fr
a spot  exchange." These two Hadiths show clearly enough that gold is  of one kind and the silver   is  of another.  A few decisions have been issued by  Islamic  Fiqh organizations"  in accordance  with  the Shari'ah ruling that has been already accepted amongst the jurists,  namely that dinars are of a different kind from dirhams.  Contemporary  Islamic  Fiqh  scholars have made  an analogy between  paper  and  coin  money  and gold  and silver money ref zrred  to in the prophetic  Hadith.  The currency  of each

(2) Related  by Muslim  in his "Sahih Muslim".
(3)  Related   by AI-Bukhari  in his "Sahih Al-Bukhari".
(4) Among other examples is the one issued by the General council of Fatwa in Kuwait as
follows: It is  permissible to sell currencies  that are different from each other because every currency is considered as a kind of money on its own, like that of gold and silver, and therefore  it ls permissible  to sell a particular  currency  such as dollar, for another currency such as Indian  Rupee even for Inequality as it is permissible to sell gold for silver for a different weight, provided the bilateral taking possession of the two counter values (  two currencies)  must  take place in the session  of the contract.  However, if a certain amount of a particular currency is sold for the same currency such as Indian rupee for  Indian  rupee,  then the inequality is impermissible  (Majmuat Al-Fatawa AI- Shar'iyyah", Adminsitration of Fatwa of Kuwait 3/160 no. 788).



62





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (1):  Trading  in  Currencies

country  is considered as being of a kind that is different  from  that of other countries  as they are 'constructive money'  according  to the decision  of the International Islamic  Fiqh  Academy."   Therefore,  these  currencies  differ in kind according to the authority that  considers  them  as money.
On this basis,  it has been a condition,  in the exchange of currencies  that are of the same kind, that equality in amount  as well as taking possession  of the two countervalues before the two contracting parties depart  the place of the closing of the contract.  However, if the kind of the currencies  to be exchanged  is different, then it is permissible  for the amounts  to be different, but the condition of taking  possession  of the countervalues before the two contracting parties  leave the place of signature of the contract shall prevail.

Shari'ah  Ruling  on Trading in Currencies

The original  ruling  on trading  in currencies  is  that  it is  permissible,  as it falls under  the general Islamic provisions  regarding  the permissibility of selling gold,  silver and money because this is one means of earning  a profit. This  ruling  is  applicable  as long as there  is  no reason  for considering  the dealing as prohibited or objectionable. The basis of this ruling is the Hadith that  are  available  with  regard  to  exchange  of currencies  and  the  general ruling  that  is  derived  from  these  Hadith  as decided  by the jurists  in the chapter  on currency  exchange.  Whenever   one  of the  Sharf'ah  precepts  is not met,  then the dealing  is not permissible.

Stipulation  of Equality and Taking  Possession

While equality of the countervalues and concurrent taking of possession are  required   in  the  exchange  of two  similar   kinds  of currencies,  only bilateral taking  of possession  is required  in the exchange of two dissimilar kinds,  based on the basis stated in ( 1)  above.

Constructive Possession

Constructive  possession  -as  in  the  forms  mentioned in the standard• is  on an equal footing  with actual  possession,  because  the Shari'ah  never prescribed a particular method  for taking  possession. Therefore, reference must be made  to the prevailing  custom  in the business  community which

(5) The  International  Islamic  Fiqh  Academy Resolution  No.  21  (9/3).



63





Shari'ah Standard No.  (1):  Trading in  Currencies

results in the ability to dispose  of the currency  for the intended  purpose and transfer  of the risk of the currency  to the transferee,  as in the forms mentioned  in the standard.

As for  the various  forms  of constructive  possession,  there  is  a decision issued by the International Islamic Fiqh Academy,"  and the various Fatwa Committees  have added to these forms some others,  such as the credit card settlement coupon.

The Ninth Seminar  of Al Baraka"has confirmed the prohibition of giving a guarantee by one of the parties in Mudarabah a- Musharakah transactions to the other party,  to indemnify  him against currency risks.

Agency in Exchange of Currencies and  Issue of Taking  Possession

Agency  in  exchange  of  currencies is  permissible  because  agency  is permissible  with  regard  to an activity that  the principal  could  undertake personally.  As one could undertake  the exchange himself,  then  it is  also permissible  for him  to authorise  its  undertaking   by  others  on his  behalf. However,   since   taking   possession   of  the   countervalues    immediately after  concluding  the  contract  has  been  a juristic  condition,  the juristic requirement  in the case of agency would be the taking  possession  by the parties  to the contract  of exchange,  whether  through  principal  or agent. When  the agency is  for  the purpose  of taking possession only,  the juristic rule relates  to the leaving  of the place of execution of the contract  by both
principals before possession  is  taken,  and not to the agent's doing so.

Use of Modern Means of Communication for Trading  in Currencies

The International  Islamic  Fiqh Academy"issued a decision on the sub• ject of those means of communication.  This is  a reinforcement  of what has already been  approved  by the jurists  on  the  permissibility  of concluding

(6)  International  Islamic Fiah Academy  Resolution  No.  53  (3/6);  "Majallat Al-Majma",
vol 6 [2:  785]
(7)  Fatwa  No.  (12/6)  of AI Baraka  Seminar No.  (12), stating: A payment  slip signed by the
cardholder is tantamount  to receipt,  by means  of a cheque. In this respect  it is stronger than a cheque, as stated by experts, because it is binding on the trader  and it discharges the cardholder of the debt immediately,  and he may  not protest the collection of  the amount thereof.
(8) AI Baraka  Seminar No. 9 (9/5).
(9) The  International Islamic Fiqh Academy Resolution No.  52 (3/6)



64





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (1):  Trading in  Currencies

a contract via writing  and communications  that can be understood.  'This would cover all contemporary means such as telex,  fax  internet,  etc.

Bilateral  Promise in Exchange of Currencies
The prohibition of.a binding  bilateral promise  in an exchange of currencies is  supported  by  the majority  of Shari'ah jurists, because  binding bilateral promises  from two parties are equivalent to a contract,  and also for the reason that the bilateral  promise   is  not immediately   followed  by taking possession of. the countervalues,  since  it is  not the wish of. the parties to take possession at  that time.

Financial Institutions have a customary practice of treating promises as binding,  even when formally they are not. A promise from one party only (as  opposed to a bilateral  promise)  is  permissible  in currency exchange, even if it is binding.

Exchange of. Currencies  that Are Owed by the Parties
The basis of. the permissibility of an exchange of amounts denominated in currencies that are debts  established  as an obligation  of. the debtor,  on the condition  that the two obligations  are thereby settled,  is  that this  would entail  the settlement of the debt by discharging it.  'This  does  not involve any prohibited transaction pertaining to debts either with regard to sale or purchase.
As  for some of the  forms mentioned in the  standard, there are texts  to support  them,  inter alia,  the Hadith reported on the  authority of Ibn  Umar (may Allah  be pleased with him) who said: "T  have met the Prophet (peace be upon him) at the house ofHafsah  (may Allah  be pleased with her). And I  said to him: 'O Prophet of Allah, I would  like to ask you; I sell a camel in Al-Baqi' for a price  quoted in dinar but I take dirham, and I sell for a price  quoted in dirham but I take  dinars, I take  this from this and I give  this from this'. The Prophet (peace  be upon him)  replied:   'There is no objection to your taking the
other  currency  based  on  the price  of the  day,  provided you  do not leave  each
other with something remaining  owed  as a debt between yo',"9 Some of the
forms in the standard  are a kind of. set-off and this is permissible.

(IO)  Related by Abu Dawud, AI-Tirmidhi,  AI-Nassa'i,  bn  Majah  and A!-Hakim,  who deemed it a sound Hadith, as confirmed  by Al-Dhahabi.  It was also narrated  without a chain  of narrators, quoting only Ibn Umar  (AL-Talkhis A! Habir" [3:  26)).



65





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (1):  Trading  in  Currencies

Combination of Currency Exchange  and  Transfer of Money

The basis of the permissibility of the combination  of currency  exchange and transfer  of money  is  the  achievement  of constructive  possession  by virtue of a bank draft for the amount that is given in one currency  in return for an amount paid in another currency for the purpose of its  transfer. In this regard,  there is  a decision by the International  Islamic Academy of Fiqh that reads:  "If a transfer of money is  to be made in a currency different  from the currency  of the amount paid by the applicant,  then the transaction  is  based on currency  exchange and transfer of money. The currency  exchange takes place before  the transf er,  that is,  the customer pays the amount of money to the bank and the bank, after agreeing on the currency exchange rate that is printed  on the receipt  delivered to the customer,  issues  a bank draft on the basis of transfer of debt in the sense that has been mentioned?a

Forms  of Trading  in Currencies

The following form is not permissible: providing a type of financial facility to a customer  who wishes  to engage in currency trading which enables him to deal  in amounts  that he does  not own and to sell amounts  that he does not own.  An alternative  and permissible  form  is  that the Institution  lends the money to the customer so that the latter would then deal in amounts that he owns.  However,  this would  not be permissible  if the Institution  made it a condition of the loan  that the customer must carry out the currency trading with  the  Institution,  as this would  involve  a combination  of both loan  and
contract  of exchange.  This is  not permissible because it results  in a benefit
to the lender.  Where no such condition  is  imposed,  there is  no prohibition.
















(1l)  International  Islamic  Figh Academy  Resolution  No.  48  (1/9)



66






















Shari'ah  Standard No.  (2)



Debit Card, Charge Card and Credit Card












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page
Pref: ace...................................................................................................      71
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................          72
I.  Scope  of the Standard ............so.so.sos.so.sos.so.so.sos.so.so....        7}
2.  Characteristics of Different Types of Card............................................          72
2/1  Characteristics of the debit  card......................................................      72
2/2 Characteristics of the charge card....................................................          73
2/3 Characteristics of the credit card.....................................................          74
3. Shari'ah   Rulings for  Different Types of Card.....................................         74
4.   General Provisions...................................................................................          75
5.  Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................          76
Adoption  of the Standard......................................................................          77
Appendices
Appendix (a)   Brief History af the Preparation of the Standard..............          78
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard....................................          80








IN  THE NAME OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the  worlds,  and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and  all his companions





Preface


The purpose  of the standard  on debit card, charge card and credit card is to explain  their  types and  characteristics,  and  to lay down  the  Sharf'ah principles  for deaJing with the three types cf card by both Islamic financial Institutions  and their customers  who hold their cards and use them. The standard  also explains the Shari'ah rulings on the use of the cards in various circumstances.




























(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic  financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



71





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (2):  Debit Card, Charge Card and Credit Card





Statement of the Standard


1.  Scope of the Standard

The standard  covers debit cards, charge cards and  credit  cards  that  are issued by Institutions  to their customers  to enable the latter, by using the cards,  either to withdraw  cash from their accounts  or to obtain  credit or to pay for goods or services purchased. These cards include the following types:
• Debit card
• Charge card
• Credit card

2. Characteristics of Different  Types of Card

While some  of the characteristics  are common  to more than  one type of
card,  some are specific to a particular  type of card.

2/1   Characteristics of the debit  card

2/1/1  The  Institution issues  the card to a customer   with  available funds  in his account.

2/1/2  The card confers  on its holder the right to withdraw  cash from his account  or to pay for  goods  or services  purchased  up to the limit of the available funds ( credit balance)  on his account. The debit to the customer's  account will be immediate, and the card does not provide him with any credit.

2/1/3  The customer  will not normally  pay any charges for using this card, except when it is used to withdraw  cash or to purchase another  currency  through  another  Institution different  from the Institution that has issued  the card.

2/1/4  The issuing  Institution may charge a fee  for issuing  the card, or may make no charge for issuing it.





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (2):  Debit  Card, Charg e Card  and Credit Card

2/1/5 Some  Institutions  charge  the  party   accepting  payment   by means  of the card a commission calculated  as a percentage of such payments.

2/2  Characteristics  of the charge  card

2/2/1  The  card  provides  a credit  facility  up to  certain   ceiling  for a specified  period   of time,  as well as providing a means  of repayment.

2/2/2 The card is  used to pay for goods  and  services  and to obtain cash.
2/2/3 This  card  does  not  provide  revolving  credit  facilities  to the cardholder,  insofar  as  the  cardholder  is   obliged   to  make payment for  the  purchased goods  or services  by the  end  of a prescribed  credit  period   following  receipt  cf a statement sent by the Institution issuing the card.

2/2/4 If the cardholder  delays payment  of the  amount  due beyond the period  of free credit,  an interest  charge  is  imposed  on the cardholder but none is imposed  by the Institutions.

2/2/5 The  Institution  issuing  the  card  does  not  charge  the  card• holder any percentage commission  on purchases,  but receives a percentage commission  from  the  party accepting  the  card
on purchases  made  by using the card.

2/2/6 The  Institution   issuing  the  card  is  obliged  to  pay  the  party accepting   the  card  for  purchases   made  by the  cardholder, within   a   specified   transaction  credit   limit   (or  the  agreed increase  thereon).  This  obligation  on  the  card  issuer  to  pay for  the cardholder's  purchases  is  direct,  and is  independent of the relationship between  the party accepting the card and the cardholder.

2/2/7  The Institution  issuing the card has a personal  and direct right against the cardholder  to be reimbursed  for any payments  made on his behalf. The issuer's  right  is  absolute and independent of



73





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (2):  Debit Card, Charge Card and Credit Card

the relationship  between the cardholder  and the party accepting the card in accordance  with the contract  between them.

2/3  Characteristics  of  the credit card

2/3/1   This card provides a revolving credit facility within the credit limit and credit period determined  by the issuer of  the card. It is also a means of  payment.

2/3/2 The holder  of  a credit card is able to pay for purchases of goods and services and to withdraw  cash, within  the approved  credit limit.

2/3/3 When  purchasing goods  or services,  the  cardholder  is  given a free credit  period  during  which  the amount  due  should  be paid  and no interest  is  chargeable.  The cardholder is  also al• lowed to defier paying the amount  due and is  charged  interest for the duration  ofi the credit.  In the case of  a cash withdrawal, there  is  no free credit  period.

2/3/4 The conditions set out in items 2/2 (e),  (f) and (g)  above are equally applicable  to this  type of card.
3. Shari'ah  Rulings for Different Types of Card

3/1   Debit  card

It is  permissible  for Institutions  to issue  debit  cards, as long as the cardholder  does not exceed the balance available on  his account  and no interest charge arises out of  the transaction.

3/2  Charge card

It is permissible  for Institutions to issue charge cards on the following conditions:

3/2/1  The cardholder  is not obliged to pay interest in the case cl delay in paying the amount  due.
3/2/2 If the  Institution  obliges the  cardholder  to deposit  a sum cl money  as a guarantee  and this amount  is  not available for the use of the card holder,  then  it must be made clear that the In-



74





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (2):  Debit  Card, Charg e Card  and Credit Card

stitution  will invest the money  for the benefit  of the cardhold• er on the basis of Mudarabah and that  any profit  accruing  on this  amount   will be shared  between  the  cardholder  and  the Institution according  to a specified  percentage.

3/2/3 The  Institution  must  stipulate  that  the  cardholder  may  not use the card  for  purposes prohibited by the Shari'ah  and that the Institution has the right to withdraw  the card in case such a condition is violated.

3/3  Credit card

It is  not permissible for an Institution  to issue credit cards that provide an interest-bearing   revolving  credit  facility,, whereby  the cardholder pays interest for being allowed to pay off the debt in instalments.

4. General Provisions

4/1  The affiliation of the  Institution to membership of international
card regulatory organizations

4/1/1  I is permissible  for Institutions  to join the membership of inter• national card regulatory organizations,  provided the Institutions avoid  any infringements   of Sharf'ah  that  may be prescribed  by those organizations.

4/1/2 I is  permissible  for the Institutions  to pay membership  fees, service charges and other  fees to international card regulatory organizations, so long as these do not include interest payments, even in an indirect way, such as  in the case of increasing  the service charge to cater for the granted  credit.

4/2  Commission to the card  issuer  payable by merchants  accepting
the card

It  is  permissible for the Institution  issuing  the card to charge a com• mission to the party accepting the card, at a percentage ofthe purchase price of the items  and services purchased  using the card.

4/3  Fees charged by the Institution to the card.holder

It is  permissible   for  the Institution  issuing  the card  to  charge  the
cardholder membership fees, renewal fees and replacement f2es



75





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (2):  Debit Card, Charge Card and Credit Card

4/4 Purchasing gold,  silver and currency with cards

It is  permissible  to purchase  gold, silver or currency  with a debit  card or a charge  card, in cases where the issuing Institution is  able  to settle the amount  due to the party accepting  the card without  any delay.

4/5 Cash  withdrawal  using a card

4/5/1  It is permissible  for the card.holder  to withdraw  an amount  of cash within the limit of his available funds,  or more  with  the agreement  of the  Institution  issuing  the  card,  provided   no interest  is  charged.

4/5/2 I is  permissible  for the Institution issuing the card to charge a flat  service  foe  for  cash  withdrawal,  proportionate  to the service  offered,  but  not  a fee  that  varies  with  the  amount withdrawn.

4/6 Privileges granted by card  issuing parties

4/6/1  I is   not  permissible  for  Institutions  to grant  the  cardholder privileges prohibited  by the Shari'ah,  such as conventional life insurance,  entrance  to prohibited places or prohibited  gifts.

4/6/2  It is permissible to grant privileges to the cardholder that are not prohibited  by the Shari'ah,  such  as a priority right  to services or discounts   on  hotel,  airline  or  restaurant reservations  and the like.
5. Date of Issuance of the Standard

The Standard was issued on 27 Safar 1421  A.H., corresponding to 31  May
2000A.D.














76





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (2):  Debit  Card, Charge Card  and Credit Card





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah  Standard on Debit Card,  Charge Card and Credit  Card was adopted  by the Shari'ah  Board  in its meeting No.  (4)  held  on 25-27 Safar
1421  A.H.,  corresponding to 29-31  May 2000 A.D.













































77





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (2):  Debit Card, Charge Card and Credit Card





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (1) held in Bahrain on Saturday 11 Dhul-Qa'dah 1419
A.H., corresponding to 27 February 1998 A.D,, the Shari'ah Board decided to give  priority  to  the preparation  cf a Shari'ah  standard  on debit card, charge card and credit card.

On Saturday  11 Dhul-Qadah  1419 A.H., corresponding  to 27  February
1999 A.D., a Shari'ah consultant  was commissioned to prepare  a juristic study and an exposure draft.
In its meeting held in Bahrain on 13-16 Rabi' I,  1420 A.H, corresponding to 27-30 June  1999  A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Studies  Committee  discussed the juristic study and inserted certain amendments  to it.  The committee also discussed the exposure draft of the standard in its meeting No.  (3)  held in Bahrain  on 9-11  Rajah 1420  A.H., corresponding  to 18-20  October  1999
A.D. and, asked the consultant to make the necessary amendments  in light
of the comments made by the members.

The revised exposure draft of the standard was presented to the Shari'ah Board in its  meeting No.  (2) held in Mecca on 10-15  Ramadan 1420 A.H., corresponding  to  18-22  December  1999  A.D.  The Shari'ah  Board  made further amendments to the exposure draft of the standard and decided that it should be distributed to specialists and interested parties to obtain their comments in order to discuss them in a public hearing.

A public hearing was held in Bahrain on 29--30 Dhul-Hajjah 1421  A.H., corresponding  to 4-5  April 2000 A.D.  The public hearing was  attended by more than 30 participants representing central banks, Institutions, accounting firms, Shari'ah scholars, academics and others who are interested in this field. Members of the Shari'ah Studies Committee responded in the



78





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (2):  Debit  Card, Charg e Card  and Credit Card

public hearing  to the written  comments  as well  as to the  oral comments that were expressed in the public hearing.
The  Sharf'ah  Studies  Committee   held  its   meeting  No   (5)  on  22-24
Muharram   1421  A.H.,  corresponding to 26-28 April 2000 A.D,,  to discuss the comments made  about  the exposure  draft. The committee  made  the necessary  amendments, which  it  deemed  necessary  in light of both  the discussions that took place in the public hearing, and the written comments that were received.

The Shari'ah Board in its meeting Na (4) held on 25-27 Safar  1421  A.H., corresponding to 29-31  May 2000 A.D.,  in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah
discussed   the  amendments  made  by  the  Shari'ah  Studies  Committee,
and  made the necessary  amendments, which  it deemed  necessary.  Some paragraphs  cf the standard   were adopted  by the  unanimous vote  cf the members of the Shari'ah Board,  while the other  paragraphs  were adopted by the  majority  vote of the members,  as recorded  in the  minutes  of the Shari'ah  Board.































79





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (2):  Debit  Card, Charg e Card  and Credit Card





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


1. Debit Cards

It is  permissible to issue debit cards subject to the conditions mentioned  in the standard, because such issuance  does not incur any Shari'ah prohibition.
2. Charge card

It is permissible to issue charge cards subject to the conditions  mentioned in the standard, because such issuance does not incur Shari'ah prohibition and  because the contract  involved does not grant credit facilities to the cardholder  in  exchange  for  interest.  Prohibition   might  be caused  by conditions incorporated  in the contract, or by dealings of the cardholder, which contravene  the Shari'ah.

3.  Credit  card

It is  prohibited to issue credit cards, as mentioned  in the standard, where such issuance  is  based on  a contract  granting the cardholder  the right to a revolving credit on terms that involve  interest, because Riha is  prohibited in  terms of either taking or giving. The prohibition of Riha is  established through Quranic Texts, direct and certain Hadiths of the Prophet (peace be upon him)  and the consensus of Muslim scholars,  rendering its prohibition well known  in  the  Muslim  community   as  self-evident.   However,  the issuance of  credit cards free from Riba,  or from any other legal  prohibition, is  permissible.

4.  Institution's  affiliation  to  membership   of international   card  regulatory organizations   is   permissible  because  the contracts   of  the  Institutions with those  organizations  are free from Shari'ah  infringements.  The fees that  the companies  pay  are  the charges  for  the  services  rendered  by the  international  organizations,  by  granting  a license,  carrying  out set•



80





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (2):  Debit Card, Charge Card and Credit Card

off in transactions  and  other  services.  The  transactions do not  relate  to the  advance  of loans  interest,  since the  dealings  of the  Institutions  are confined  to debit and charge cards that are free from any requirement to pay interest. These dealings do not involve credit cards of the type that are not permissible for the reason given above.

5.   It is  permissible  for Institutions to  charge  the  party  accepting  a card commission based on the prices  of purchases  or services  made  with the card, as this can be considered as partly a brokerage  and marketing fee as well as a service charge for the collection of the debt.

6.  It is  permissible  for  Institutions to charge  the  cardholder  membership or renewal  or replacement  fies, because  these  fees are in exchange  for the right given to the customer  to carry the card and to benefit  from  its services.

7. Purchasing  with  a  debit  card  constitutes  constructive  possession   as endorsed by the  Shari'ah.  When  the  purchaser  receives  gold  or  silver or currencies which  he is  buying,  uses the  card and signs the payment coupon  for the account  of the party accepting  the card, then constructive possession  takes place. This ruling  is  extracted from  the decision  of the International Islamic  Fiqh Academy' which  states  that  an accounting entry  is   considered  to  be   constructive  possession.   Thus,   the   legal condition  of taking  possession  is  satisfied when  using  cards to purchase gold or silver or currencies.

8. It is  permissible for the cardholder to withdraw cash from  his available funds  at the bank  using  the card,  because  this  is  to withdraw his own money.  Likewise,  it  is  permissible  for him  to withdraw  more  than his available  funds   from  the  Institution,   if the  latter  has  agreed  that  he
may do  so and  has  not  stipulated that  interest  is  payable  on the  such amounts.  This is  a permissible loan.
9.  In the case of the Institution stipulating that the card.holder must deposit a sum of money  prior  to receiving approval  to use the card, then  it is  not

(2)  International Islamic Fioh Academy Resolution Na. 53 (4/6).



81





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (2):  Debit  Card, Charg e Card  and Credit Card

permitted for the Institution to prevent the cardholder from investing the amount deposited in his account,  as this would be tantamount  to a loan that draws extra benefit. For that reason,  the appropriate  alternative is for amounts so deposited to be invested for the benefit of the cardholder on the basis of profit and loss sharing.

















































82
























Shari'ah Standard No.  (3)



Procrastinating Debtor

(Revised Standard)












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page
Pref: ace...................................................................................................       87
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................          88

I.  Scope  of the Standard ...........so.sos«sos.so.sso.so.ss.sos.sos.sos.o...s.                                   88
2.  Shari'.ah  Ruling..........................................................................................          88
2/1  Default in payment by a debtor.......................................................           88
2/2 Guarantor...........................................................................................           89
2/3 Contractor..........................................................................................           89
2/4 Non-material punishments for default in payment .........-.so.....         90
2/5 General rulings..................................................................................   90

2/6 Establishment of default in payment..............................................           90
3.  Date of Issuance oc the Standard............................................................          90
Adoption  of the Standard......................................................................          91
Appendices
Appendix (a):   Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard...........           92
Appendix (b}:  The Shari'ah  Basis fer the Standard....................................           94
Appendix (c):   Definitions.............................................................................         IOI




















85








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE  ALL-MERCIFUL,  THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and  all his companions





Preface


The purpose  of this standard  is to explain the Shari'ah  rulings applicable to  the  transactions  of Islamic  financial  Institutions!    relating  to  solvent debtors  and/or  guarantors  procrastinating in settling their  obligations  and contractors  delaying in fulfilment of their obligations, which invokes penalty stipulated in the contract.






























(1) The  word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer, in short,  to  Islamic  financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



87





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (3):  Procrastin ating  Debtor





Statement of the Standard


1.  Scope of the Standard

This standard  covers cases of default on the part of a solvent debtor  or a solvent guarantor,  and the case of a contractor or concessionaire who is late  in completing work and thus becomes a debtor by virtue  of a penalty clause.

The standard  does not cover debtors who are  insolvent or bankrupt,  or debtors who delay payment for an established Shari'ah reason.
2. Shari'ah Ruling

2/1   Default in payment by a debtor

2/1/1  Default in payment  by a debtor  who is  capable of paying the debt is Haram  (prohibited).

2/1/2 It is  not  permitted  to  stipulate  any  financial  compensation, either  in  cash or  in other  consideration,  as a penalty  clause in respect of a delay  by a debtor  in settling  his  debt,  whether or not the amount  of such compensation  is  pre-determined; this applies both to compensation  in respect of loss of income (opportunity  loss)  and in respect of a loss  due to a change in the value of the currency of the debt.
2/1/3  It is  not permitted to make a judicial demand  on a debtor  in default to pay financial  compensation,  in the form  either  of cash or of other consideration,  for a delay  in settling his debt.

2/1/4  The procrastinating debtor is liable   for legal  and other expenses incurred by the creditor in  order to recover his debt.

2/1/5  The creditor is  entitled to apply for the sale of any asset mortgaged as collateral  for  the debt,  for  the liquidation  of the debt. He is equally entitled to stipulate that the debtor must give a mandate



88





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (3):  Procrastin ating  Debtor

to the creditor to sell the mortgaged  asset without recourse to the
courts.

2/1/6  Unless failure to pay was caused by force majeure,  it is permis• sible to stipulate that all outstanding instalments  become due once the procrastinating debtor fails to pay an instalment.  It is preferable that this clause  is implemented only after notifying the debtor and after the lapse of a reasonable period of:  time. [see Shari'ah Standard No.  (5) on  Guarantees (item 5/1)]

2/1/7  In the case of a Murabahah sale,  if the asset that was sold  is  still available  in the  condition in which it  was sold,  and the  buyer has defaulted in the settlement of: the  price and has later become bankrupt, then the seller (the Institution) is entitled to repossess the asset instead ct: initiating procedures to obtain a bankruptcy order.

2/1/8  It is  permissible  in contracts  involving indebtedness  (such as  Murabahah)  to stipulate  an undertaking by the debtor,  that in  case  ct: procrastinating in payment,  the latter  will donate an amount or a  percentage ct the debt to be spent  for charitable causes  through the Institution.

2/2  Guaran tor

a)  It is permissible for a creditor to demand that a debt be settled by the debtor or the  guarantor of the debtor,  unless the guarantor stipulated that the settlement must first be sought  from the debtor.

b)  AII rulings applicable to debtors in default are equally applicable
to guarantors in default.

2/3  Contractor

It is permissible to include penalty clauses in contracts for construction, Istisna'a and supply contracts.  In case of a refusal  to pay the amount due under a penalty clause, the rulings relating to default by a debtor would be  applicable. It is  permitted to deduct the amount from outstanding amounts due to the contractor.



89





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (3):  Procrastin ating  Debtor

2/4 Non-material punishments  for default  in payment

The Institution  is  entitled to include the name  of a debtor in default in a list of undesirable  customers  (black list) and to send a warning admonition   to other  companies  about  the defaulting  debtor, either when there  is  an inquiry  from other companies  about the debtor  or when such black lists  are exchanged  between companies  directly.

2/5  General rulings

2/5/1 The  Institution  is  entitled  to  [monitor  and]  investigate  [the financial  status and activities]  of a defaulting  debtor  through all permissible  and legitimate  means.

2/5/2  The  Institution may accept  a payment  from  a debtor  who  is in default that is in excess of the amount  of the debt, provided there is  no contractual  condition   whether  written  or verbal, or  custom  or  mutual   agreement   relating  to  this  additional amount.

2/5/3 It is  permissible  for the  Institution   to stipulate  in a contract dealing with indebtedness  that, if the debtor  is late in making payment, the Institution  is  entitled  to recoup the amount  due from any of the accounts  of the customer  with  the Institution, whether  current  accounts  or investment  accounts.  This  may be  done  without  getting  any  further   consent  of  the  debtor provided  the balance in the account is  of the same currency  as that of the debt.  If, however,  the currency is  different, then the rate of exchange to be used must be the then prevailing rate of exchange.

2/6  Establishment of default  in payment

Default in payment is established when, following a normal  demand for payment, a debtor who has not proved that he is insolvent fails to settle the debt on its due date.

3. Date of Issuance  of the Standard

The Standard was issued on 27 Safar  1421  A.H.,  corresponding  to 31  May
2000A.D.



90





Sh arf'ah  Standar d Na (3):  Procrastin ating  Debtor





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'.ah  Standard  on Procrastinating Debtor was adopted  by the Sharf'ah  Board in  its  meeting  No.  (4)  held on 25-27 Safar  1421  A.H., corresponding to 29-31  May 2000 A.D.













































91





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (3):  Procrastin ating  Debtor





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (1) held in Bahrain on Saturday 11 Dhul-Qadah  1419
A.H., corresponding to 27 February 1998 A.D., the Shari'ah Board decided to give priority to the preparation of a Shari'ah standard on procrastinating debtor.

On Saturday  11 Dhul-Qa'dah  1419 A.H., corresponding  to 27 February
1999  A.D., a Shari'ah consultant  was commissioned to prepare  a juristic study and an exposure draft.
In its meeting held in Bahrain on 13-16 Rabi' I,  1420 A.H., corresponding to 27-30  June  1999  A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Studies  Committee  discussed the juristic study and introduced  certain amendments  to it.  The  Committee further discussed the exposure draft of the standard in its meeting No. (3) held in Bahrain on 9-11  Rajab 1420  A.H., corresponding  to 18-20 October
1999  A.D,,  and asked the consultant  to make additional  amendments  to
reflect the comments made by the members.

The revised exposure draft of the standard was presented to the Shari'ah Board in its  meeting No.  (2) held in Mecca on 10-15  Ramadan 1420  A.H., corresponding  to  18-22  December  1999  A.D.  The Shari'ah  Board  made further  amendments  to the exposure draft of the standard,  and decided that the amended  exposure draft should be distributed  to specialists and interested  parties  to  obtain  their  comments  in order to  discuss them in a public hearing.
A public hearing was held in Bahrain on 29-30  Dhul-Hajjah 1421  A.H., corresponding  to  4-5 April  2000 A.D.  The public hearing was attended by more than 30 participants  representing  central banks, Institutions, ac• counting firms, Shari'ah scholars,  academics and others who are interested





Sh arf'ah  Standard  Na (3):  Procrastin ating  Debtor

in this field. Members  of the Sharf'ah Studies Committee  responded  to the written  comments  that  were sent prior  to the public hearing  as well as to the oral comments  that were expressed in the public hearing.

The  Sharf'ah   Studies  Committee   held   its  meeting  No.   (5)  on  22-24
Muharram 1421  A.H.,  corresponding to 26-28 April 2000 A.D., to discuss the  comments  made  about  the  exposure   draft.   The  Committee  made the  necessary  amendments,  which  it deemed  necessary  in light  of both the  discussions   that  took  place  in  the  public  hearing,  and  the  written comments  that were received.

The Shari'ah  Board  in its meeting No.  (4) held on 25-27 Safar  1421  A.H., corresponding to 26-28 May 2000 A.D.,  in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah
discussed   the  amendments  made   by  the  Shari'ah  Studies   Committee,
and made the necessary amendments, which deemed necessary. Some paragraphs   of the  standard  were adopted  by  the  unanimous  vote of the members  of the Shari'ah Board,  while the other  paragraphs  were adopted by  the  majority  vote of the  members,  as recorded  in the  minutes  of the Shari'ah  Board.

The Shari'ah Standards  Review Committee  reviewed the standard  in its meeting  held in Muharram   1433  A.H.,  corresponding to November  201  1
A.D.,  in the State  of Qatar,  and proposed  after deliberation  a set of amend•
ments (additions,  deletions,  and rephrasing)  as deemed  necessary, and then submitted  the proposed  amendments to the Shari'ah  Board for approval  as it deemed  necessary.

In its  meeting No.  (38)  held in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah,  Kingdom
of Saudi  Arabia on 28  Sha'ban  -  l Ramadan  1435 A.H., corresponding  to 26•
28  June 2014 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed the proposed  amendments submitted  by the Shari'ah  Standards  Review Committee.  After deliberation, the Shari'ah  Board  approved  the necessary  amendments,  and the standard
was adopted in its  current  amended  version.









93





Sh arf'ah  Stan dar d Na  (3):  Procrastin ating Debtor





Appendix  (B)

The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Default on the Part of a Debtor

The debtor must settle his debt when it is due.  Default in payment by a debtor who is able to settle the debt is  prohibited.  The Prophet  (peace be upon him)  says:  "Default  in payment  on  the part of a solvent debtor is
unjust.'He  (peace be upon him) also says:  "Delay in payment by a solvent
debtor  would be  a legal  ground for  his  being  publicly  dishonoured  and punished."  Moreover,  he (peace  be  upon him)  approved the statement
of Salman Al-Farisi to Abu Al-Darda'  saying: "Give everyone his right."9
Muslim  scholars  have agreed  on  the  permissibility  of  a debtor  being punished  in such circumstances."   However,  an insolvent debtor should be granted a grace period.

(2)  Related   by AI-Bukhari in his Sahih  [2:  999],  Dar Al-Qalam  edition,  Damasc us, 1401
A.H./1981  A.D;  Muslim in his  "Sahi"  [10:  288], AI-Maktabah  AI-Misriyyah edition
with  the commentary   af AI-Nawawi, Cairo, 1349  A.H./1930  A.D;  and  Ahmad in his
"Mausnad" [2:  7I  and  345],  AI-Maktab  Al-Islami  edition,  Damascus.
(3)  Related    by Ahmad   in  his  "Musnad"  [4:  388-399],  and all relators of Hadith except
AI-Tirmidhi,  Al-Bayhaqi,  Al-Hakim  and  Ibn  Hibban who deemed it authentic.  Al Bukhari  deemed it 'suspended'  In his  "Fath AI-Bari",  lbn  Hajar  has said:  Its chain of transmission  is good:  "Nay] Al-Awtar" [5:  240],  Mustafa Al-Babi  A!Halabi  edition, Cairo,  1378  A.H./1951   A.D;  and "Fayd  AI-Qadir"   [5:  400],  Mustafa  Muhammad edition.  Cairo,  1371  A.H./1938  A.D.
(4) Related   by A!-Tirmidhi  from Abu  Juhayfah  quoting  the statement  af Salman   (may Allah be pleased  with  him)  which  the Prophet  (peace  be upon hlm)  approved when mentioned to  him   saying:   Salman  has  said  the   truth." AI-Tirmidhi  said:  "It  is   an authentic Hadith":  Sunan Al-Tirmidhi" [2: 66],  Bulaq  Edition.
(5)  Bada Y AI-Sana 'r[7:  173], Dar AI-Kitab Al-Arabi, Beirut, 1982 A.D;  "Al-Mwhadhdhab° [3: 245], Dar Al-Qalam  edition, Damascus, 1417 A.H./1996 A.D; "Al-Mughn" [4: 501], Maktabat  Riyad AI Hadithah,  Riyadh;  "Hashiyat Qalybf [2:  288],  Dar Al-Fikr edition, Beirut,  no  date;   M/jam  Al-Mustalahat Al-Hqtisadiyyal", (P.   314);  The  International Institute  of Islamic  Thought  edition,  Virginia,  USA,  1415  A.H./1995  A.D;  and "Dahit Al-Mustalahat  AFiqhiyyah  AHqtisadiyyah",  (P.  274),  Kuwait  Finance  House edition, Kuwait,  1412  A.H./1992A.D.



94





Sharf'ah Standard Na  (3): Procrastinating Debtor

Stipulation  of, or Legal  Claim  for,  Compensation for  Late  Payment  of
the Debt

It is not  permitted  to stipulate  as a condition  of a contract involving indebtedness that  in case of default  the debtor  should  pay compensation, or  to  have  a legal  claim  for  compensation  against  a defaulting debtor, whether such  arrangements are made  at the beginning of the contract  or on its  maturity,  since this  would  constitute Riba and any such stipulation or arrangement  is  null  and  void.  This  is  because  the  Prophet   (peace  be upon  him) says: "Muslims  are bound  by their contractual  conditions, except those  that render  impermissible  what is  permissible or  render  permissible what is   impermissible"" There  is   also  the  reason  that,  during   the  pre• Islamic  period,  lenders  who charged  interest  used  to say to their  debtors: "Do you want  to settle  now or to pay  an additional amount for a further period  of credit?  The prohibition  of any loan  which  requires  a payment in excess  of the  amount lent  has  also been  reported on the  authority; of many  companions from  the Prophet  (peace  be upon  him).  On this basis, a decision  was reached  by the International Islamic Fiqh Academy  which reads  as  follows:  "It  is   impermissible  from  the  Shari'ah  perspective  to stipulate a condition of compensation in the case of delay in the settlement of a debt."7

No penalty clause may be applied in the case of a delay  in settling a debt, as any increase in the amount  of the  debt  is  Riba;  this  is  in contrast to the application of a penalty clause to other cases of delay, such as delay in fulfilling construction  or Istisna'a contracts. As the judgement on this issue by the court is  binding,  it  is  therefore  not permitted  to stipulate such a condition  directly in the contract  creating a debt or to enforce it subsequently  by recourse to the judiciary.

(6)  This Hadith  has been narrated  by a number of the companions  and it was related   by Ahmad in his  Musnad"  [L:   312];  Ibn  Majah  through a good chain of transmission [2:  783],  Mustafa A!Babi  AHalabi  edition,  Cairo,  1372  A.H./1952  A.D; ALHakim in his  "Mustadrak, Hyderabad edition,  India,  1355  A.H.);  Al-Bayhaqi in his  "Sunan" [6:  70  and 156]  and [I:  133],  Hyderabad edition,  India,  1355  A.H;  and Al-Darqutni in his  "Sunan"  [4:  228]  and [3:  77],  Dar A!-Mahasin  LilTba'ah  edition, Cairo,  1372
A.H./1952  AD
(7)  International Islamic Fiqh Academy  Resolution  No. (51);  and Majallat Majmad Al-Fiqh
A1-Islam!", No. 6 [I:  193];  and No.  6 [2:  9].



95





Sharf'ah  Stan dar d Na  (3):  Procrastinating Debtor

Litigation Expenses

A defaulting debtor must bear the litigation expenses and other expenses relating to his default in payment  as he is  the cause of the expenses"

Disposal  of a Mortgaged Asset

It is  permissible  for  the creditor  to demand  the selling of a mortgaged asset and other properties  belonging to a debtor which are in his possession for the purpose  of liquidation  and recovery of the debt.  Furthermore,  it is permissible  for the creditor  to obtain  a mandate  from the debtor to sell the mortgaged  assets or other  properties  of the debtor,  because such disposal is  permissible  for  the  creditor,  and such  a practice  would  speed  up  the procedures  for  disposing of the charged  asset.~

Maturity of Instalments  in the Case of Instalment  Credit
It  is  permissible   for  the  creditor  to  impose  the  condition   that,  if the debtor is  late  in paying one instalment,  all the instalments  become due.  To this  effect,  there is a decision by the International  Islamic Academy of Fiqh, the text of which  reads as follows:  "It  is permissible  for a seller  on def rred credit  terms  sale to  impose  the  condition  that  instalments  become  due before their  original  due date in case of  the delay  of the debtor  in paying
some of the instalments,  so long  as the debtor consented  to this condition when the contract  was agreed"   Such  a condition  would be valid,  as there is  no  Shari'ah  text  to  the  contrary,  and  it  serves  a lawful  interest  of the creditor.     Giving prior  notice  to the  debtor  before giving effect to such

(8)  Some  of the jurists  have  stated  this such  as bn Taymiyyah  in Al-Ikhtiyarat" and in "Mukhtasar Al-Fatawa" P. 346),  Al-Mawardi   in A!-Insaf " and Sheikh Muhammad  Ibn Ibrahim Al Al-Shaykh   (see:  Paper   by Sheikh  Ibn Mani'  in the Fourth   Fiqh Conference (pp. 226-227),  organized  by Kuwait  Finance   House 1416  A.H./1995  A.D.
(9) Al-Rawd Al-Murbi", (P.  74),  2 edition, Dar AI-Turath, Caira
(I0)  International  Islamic  Fiqgh  Academy  Resolution   No. (51);  "Majallat Majma' AL-Flqh Al• Islamt" No.  6 [1:  193]  and No.  7  [2: 9].  This has been reinforced  by the Resolution  No.
64 (2/7);  see: "Majallat Jamat Al-Malik 'bd Al-'Aziz", A-Jqtisad A!-Islami,  (P.  89).
(11)  Ibn  Abidin  says;  'If one  says,  I  have   invalidated   the  deferred   period   and I   have
abandoned   it, the debt becomes due on the spot":  "Hashiyat lbn Abidin" [5:  157],  Dar
A!Fikr  edition,  Beirut,   1399  A.H./1979  A.D.  The  Shari'ah  Supervisory  Council  of
the Kuwait   Finance  House has supported  this in its Fatwa  No.  (542).  4! Fatawa Al•
Shar'iyyah AL-Masa'il Al-Iqtisadiyyah", Kuwait  Finance  House,  [4:  18]



96





Sharf'ah  Standard Na  (3):  Procrastinating Debtor

a condition  is  merely of the nature  of a reminder,  so as to provide him with reasonable time for payment.

The Right  to Repossess  a Sold  Asset
If an asset sold by Murabahah  or another  sales contract is still available to the seller, and the purchaser  has defaulted in the payment  of the price, and subsequently  has become bankrupt,  then  the seller is  entitled  to repossess
the sold asset instead  of initiating  legal  proceedings  to obtain a bankruptcy order.  This judgement  is  based on the report  of Abu Hurayrah  (may Allah
be pleased  with him)  that the Prophet  (prayers and peace cf Allah be upon him)  said:  If one party has sold an asset and the other party (the  purchaser) has become bankrupt,  and the former party has managed to retain the asset, then he is  more qualified to take possession of the asset in preference to the other creditors.2

A Commitment on the Part  of the Debtor  to Make  a Donation in Case of
Default

The permissibility  of stipulating a condition,  whereby the debtor in case of default is obliged to donate a sum of money (in  addition to the amount of the debt) to be spent by the creditor (the  Institution)  on charitable causes,  is because this has been considered  as an instance of the commitment  to make a donation, which is  well established in the Maliki school  cf law.  This  is  the opinion of Abu Abdullah Ibn Naf'  and Muhammad  Ibn  Ibrahim  Ibn Dinar, two Maliki jurists.3

Guarantor

A guarantor  is  liable  for anything  for which  the  debtor  whose  debt is guaranteed   is  liable,  because  standing  as a surety  adds  one obligation  to another  with respect to the liability,  This is  in line with the Quranic  verse expressing  the  statement  of Prophet  Yusuf  (peace  be  upon  him)  saying: ("...  and I will be a guarantor   to it}" Also,  the Prophet  (peace   be upon

(12)  This Hadith has been related  by Al-Bukhari in his  "Sahih" [2:  846];  and Muslim  in his  "Sahih"  [10:  221].  Also, see: 41Muhadhdhab" by  Al-Shirazi  [3:  253],  Dar Al Qalam edition, Damascus 1417 A.H./1996 A.D.
(13)  See the book entitled:  Tahrir AL-Kalam  F Masail Al-Iltizam" by Al-Hattab  and the
legal opinions of the Fourth Fiqh Conference  organized by the Kuwait Finance House.
(14)  [Yusuf(Joseph):  72].



97





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na  (3): Procrastinating Debtor

him)  affirmed  the suretyship  of Abu Qatadah  in  respect  of the debt of a deceased person, when Abu Qatadah said; I take responsibility as surety for both (two dinars),  O Messenger of Allah'JM is  a principle of law that the demand for payment from either the debtor or guarantor is permissible, as this is the very essence of suretyship, so long as there is  no stipulation that the demand be in sequence; that is, it must start with the debtor and once he refuses to pay, payment will be demanded from the guarantor,  because this sequence is a valid stipulation and believers are bound by their stipulations.

Contractor or Concessionaire

It is  permissible to impose penalty clauses in contracts  for constructions, Istisna'a and supply, contracts,  as such  clauses are included  in what may,  be validly, stipulated aspart ct the contract This does not render the impermissible permissible, or vice versa, and it  complies with the Hadith of the Prophet (peace be upon him):  Muslims  are bound  by contractual conditions,  except those that render impermissible what  is permissible  or render permissible  what is  impermissible.  Also, this is based on the statement of Shurayh  (may Allah confer mercy upon him) saying: "Whoever has bound himself by a contractual
condition voluntarily without any coercion,  is  bound by that condition". The
International Islamic Fiqh Academy has also issued a decision which states: "It is permissible to include in an Istisna'a contract a penalty clause according to what is agreed upon by the two contracting parties provided that there are no unusual circumstances.{  In addition, it is  a juristic principle in the Hanbali school of law. This  is also what has been decided by consensus ct the Council of the Eminent Scholars of Saudi Arabia, in the following words: "The council has decided by consensus that a penalty clause that is stipulated in a contract is a valid and enforceable stipulation.{  I is well  known that the stipulation of the penalty clause  is permissible only for non-financial obligations.

(1I5)  Related   by AI-Bukhari in his "Sahih  [2: 800-803]; Ahmad and others. (16)  This Hadith has been previously explained under Note  No. (5).
(17)  International Islamic Fiqh Academy  Resolution No.  56 (3/7);  see also the Journal of
the Academy vol. 2,  issue No.  (7), (p. 223).
(I8)  Research papers by  the Eminent Scholars of the Kingdom of Saudi  Arabia, vol.  1, the
penalty clause, Maktabat  Ibn Khuzaymah edition, Riyadh, 1412 A.H.



98





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na  (3):  Procrastinating Debtor

Non-Material Penalties Applied to the Debtor in Case of Default

The grounds  for such penalties  lie in the jurists'  decision  which  is  based on their  interpretation  of the Hadith  of the Prophet  (peace  be upon  him): "Delay  in payment by a solvent  debtor  wold  be a legal ground for his  being publicly criticised and punished".9 A public complaint  about his default in payment  is not a prohibited slander;  on the contrary,  there  is an obligation to warn other companies  about his character, as this flls under  the category ct advice which it  is a duty to give.
General Provisions
a) The  monitoring  of the  affairs  of the  default  debtor,  is   a  kind  of pursuing  that has been established by the Shari'ah jurists. This pursuit is  intended  to make recovery from  the defaulting debtor  out of assets that  he may have concealed  from  the knowledge  of the creditor.  In the  circumstances,  such  pursuit  does  not  constitute   interference  in
the affairs  of others.

b) The debtor may, entirely at his  own discretion  without  any condition or customary practice, pay an additional amount  when  settling  the debt, and this is part of good settlement following the saying of  Allah:
{"..No  ground (of complaint)  can  there  be against  the Muhsinun
(good-doers).7J.     Also,  the prophetic  Hadith  says:  "Verily  the best of you  is he  who   is the  best  in the settlement of debt."    The Prophet (peace be upon  him), occasionally  used to pay an additional amount
when  settling  a debt. The  permissibility  of this practice depends  on the discretionary nature  of this extra payment  and the absence of any stipulation  or customary practice  of making  such  a payment,  since the  existence  of such  a customary practice  would  be  inconsistent with  the  condition   that  the extra  payment  be entirely discretionary and not stipulated.
c)  It is permissible to accept the extra amount  paid by the debtor following the proofs  mentioned earlier.

(19)  This Hadith has been previously explained under Note No.  (3).
(20)  [Al-Tawbah  (Repentance): 91].
(21)  Related  by A!-Nasai  on the authority of AI-'Irbad  Ibn Sariyah:  Fayd Al-Qadir"
[3:  497]



99





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na  (3):  Procrastin ating  Debtor

d) A stipulation  by an Institution that it may recover amounts owing to it by a defaulting debtor by right of set-off from accounts of the debtor that  are  kept  by  the  Institution   is  valid,  since believers are  bound by  their  stipulations.  This  right  of set-off. even  though  it  does  not require the consent  of the debtor,  should preferably be  documented in the contract that establishes the indebtedness, in order to shorten the
procedures in case of dispute.  This right is  based on the amicable right of recovery that is  based on Shari'ah evidence including the saying of the Prophet  (peace  be upon  him)  to the wife of Abu Sufyan: "Take (from his property) what would suffice you and your child amicably.





































(22)  Related by A!-Bukhari and Muslim:  Al-Lu 'lw'  Wa Al-Marjan",  No. (1115).



100





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (3):  Procrastin ating  Debtor





Appendix (C)
Definitions


Default  in payment

Delay in the settlement  of an obligation  or in paying an amount  due for payment,  without  any legitimate  reason.

Procrastinating  debtor

A debtor who is  solvent but refuses to pay a debt that is  due,  without any legitimate  reason,  after receiving the normal  demand  for  payment.

Penalty clause

An agreement  between two parties to a contract  stipulating a pre-deter• mined  amount  of compensation  that will be due to the obligee, should  the obligor delayed carrying  it  out.





























101

























Shari'ah Standard No.  (4)



Settlement of Debts by Set-Off

(Revised Standard)












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page
Pref: ilce...................................................................................................     107
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................         108
1.   Scope of the Standard..............................................................................        108
2.  Definition of Set-Off and its V:arious  Forms.........................................        108
3.  Bilateral Exchange of Promises to Conclude a Set-Off in the Future         110
4.  Application  of the Rules cf Set-Off to Some Modem Transactions..        111
5.  Currency Swaps........................................................................................        Ill
6.  Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................        112
Adoption  of the Standard......................................................................         113
Appendices
Appendix  (a):   Brief History  of the Preparation of the Standard.............         114
Appendix  (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard...................................          116
Appendix  (c):   Definitions............................................................................          117

























105








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE  ALL-MERCIFUL,  THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all his companions





Preface


The aim of this standard is  to outline the rules governing the use of set• off in settling  debts,  the Shari'ah  requirements  and conditions  applicable to set-off, what is  permissible or not permissible in this procedure and the most  significant  practices  of Islamic financial  Institutions  (Institution/ Institutions)"in this regard.






























(1) The  word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including  Islamic Banks.



107





Sharf'ah  Standard Na (4):  Settlement of Debts by Set-Off





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard  covers the settlement  of debt by way of set-off. 'The standard shall not apply to discharge  of liability by way of transfer,  waiving of obli• gation, composition, acquisition  of a right payable or bilateral cancellation of a contract,  as they are covered by their respective  Standards.

2. Definition  of Set-Off and  Its Various  Forms

A set-off is to extinguish a debt receivable by a debt payable.  It is  divided into two main  forms:  mandatory set-off and contractual set-off.

2/1   Mandatory set-off

A  mandatory  set-off is  a set-off  that  occurs  without   the need  for bilateral agreement or consent  of both  indebted  parties  and,  in some cases of mandatory set-off, it is one party that is forced to comply with the request of the other  party for set-off. It is  divided into compulsory set-off (on  both parties) and set-off on demand  (of the person  with the superior  debt whereby  the other  party  is  obliged to comply with the demand).

2/1/1  A compulsory set-off is  the spontaneous discharge  of two debts that is  not contingent on the request or consent of both or either party.

2/1/2  The conditions  of the permissibility of compulsory set-off are the following:
a) Each party  should  be a creditor and debtor  simultaneously. b) Both  debts  should  be equal  in kind,  type,  description  and
maturity.  However,  if the two debts are not equal in amount,
a set-off will take place  of an equivalent   amount on  both

(2) Compulsorily set-off is a set-off that occurs without a need to bilateral agreements or consents of the parties.



108





Sharf'ah  Standard Na (4):  Settlement of Debts by Set-Off

sides,  and the party  that is owed the larger debt will remain a creditor  for the remaining  balance.
c)  Neither of the two debts should be encumbered  by an obliga• tion to a third party, such as the right of a mortgagee to one of the debts.  The intention  of this is  to protect rights  associated with the amount ct the debt and belonging to thin! parties.
d) The set-off should not be arranged in a manner that results in violation of a rule of Shari'ah, such as Riba (usury)  a Shubhat al-Riba  (a transaction  potentially involving  Riba).

2/1/3  A set-off on demand  is the discharge of two debts at the request of the creditor for  the superior  debt and his consent to forgo the excess of the amount  or privilege he is  owed over what he owes. This set-off will take place whether  or not the creditor  for the smaller  debt consents.

2/1/4  The conditions  of permissibility  of a set-off on demand  are the following:
a) Each party should  be a creditor  and debtor  simultaneously. b) The creditor  for the superior  debt,  in terms  of quality  and
duration,  should  consent  to relinquish  his additional   right
or privilege.  An example  of superiority  in terms  of quality is  when  the debt is  secured by a mortgage, or when  a third party  has given a guarantee  to pay the debt,  and the owner of the  secured  debt  consents  to  relinquish   this  guarantee. Superiority   in terms  of duration   exists  if the  duration   of one of the debts  is  shorter,  or one debt is now due and the other  is  not yet due.  In these cases, the debt which has the shorter  duration  or which  is  now due is superior.
c) Both  debts  should  be  similar  in  kind  and  type,  but  not necessarily   in  quality  and  date  of maturity.   However,   if the  two  debts  are  not  equal  in  amount,  a set-off  will take place of an equivalent  amount  on both  sides, and  the party that  is owed the  larger debt  will remain  a creditor for the remaining balance.



109





Shari'ah Standard Na (4):  Settlement of Debts by Set-Off

d) The set-off should  not be arranged  in a manner  that results in violation  cf a rule  of Shari'ah,  such  as Riba  (usury)  or a transaction  potentially  involving Riba.

2/2 Contractual  set-off

2/2/1  A contractual  set-off is the discharge of two debts by the consent of the two parties to extinguish  their obligations towards  each other.

2/2/2 The conditions  of the permissibility of a contractual  set-off are the following:
a) Each party  should  be a creditor and debtor simultaneously. b) The two parties  should mutually consent  to the set-off.
c)  The set-off should  not be arranged  in a manner  that results
in violation of a rule of Shari'ah,  such  as Riba or a transaction potentially involving  Riba.
2/2/3 A contractual set-off is permissible even without the need for two debts to be similar in kind, type, description or maturity. This is because the agreement  on contractual  set-off means that each party has agreed to relinquish any extra privilege associated with
his  debt. A contractual  set-off is  also permissible if the two debts
are  not  equal in terms of amount,  in which case a set-off will take place of an equivalent amount on both sides, and the party that is  owed the larger  debt is entitled  to request payment of the remaining balance.  [see  item  2/10  (a)  of the Shari'ah  Standards on Trading in Currencies]

3. Bilateral Exchange  of Promises to Conclude a Set-Off  in the Future

It is  permissible for the Institution  and its customers or other Institutions to  exchange  bilateral  promises  that  debts  that  may be  created  between them  in the future will be settled by way of set-off,  in which case all the conditions  mentioned  in the items  2/1  and  2/2 will be applicable at  the time of actual set-off.  However,  if the currencies  of the two debts differ, a bilateral exchange of promise of set-off should be concluded on the basis



110





Sharf'ah  Standard Na (4):  Settlement of Debts by Set-Off

that a set-off will take place based on the current currency  exchange  rate at the time of actual  set-off  this  ruling is to prevent the practices  of Riba by roundabout methods  or by implied agreement  for practicing  Riha.

4. Application of the Rules  of Set-Off to Some Modern Transactions

Tbe followings  are some rules of set-off to modern transactions:

4/1   Stipulating set-off between the customer  and the Institution  in respect of debts to the Institution  arising out of sales on deferred payment. 'The agreement  on contractual  set-off of future debts, commonly  known as set-off and consolidation,  is  a practice  employed  by a large  number of financial  Institutions.  This  form  of set-off may take  place either compulsorily  or contractually depending  on wbether the situation that gives rise to this set-off meets the conditions of compulsory set-off or the conditions  of contractual  set-off. Moreover,  by pre-stipulating this type cf set-off in the agreement,  a fresh agreement  may be avoided  at the time cf set-off when the two currencies  are diffierent or when one
of the debts is superior  to the other.

4/2  A set-off  may take  place  between  a financial  Institution  accepting a cheque  and the drawer  of the cheque, through the clearing-house. This  form  of set-off  may  also  take  place  either   compulsorily  or contractually depending on whether the state that  gives rise to this set-off meets the conditions of compulsory set-off or the conditions of contractual set-off.

4/3  Set-off that  is   concluded  among   fi nancial  Institutions  through international  or national networking systems,  such  as credit  card or  debit  card  organisations.  This  form  of set-off may  be either compulsory or  contractual depending  on  whether the  state  that gives  rise to this set-off meets the conditions of compulsory set-off or the conditions of contractual set-off.

5. Currency Swaps

Tbe currency  swaps that are concluded on the basis ofRiba are not permis• sible.  Tbis is because in  this  process it is the interest-based  securities  that are set-off against interest-based securities.



111





Sharl'ah  Standard Na (4):  Settlement of Debts by Set-Off

6. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 29 Safar 1422 A.H., corresponding to 23 May
2001  A.D.




















































112





Sharf'ah  Standard Na (4):  Settlement of  Debts by Set-off





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah  Standard  on Settlement  of  Debts by  Set-off was adopted by the Shari'ah Board in its meeting No.  (6) held on 25-29 Safar  1422 A.H., corresponding  to 19-23 May 2001  A.D.













































113





Shari'ah Standard Na (4):  Settlement af Debts by Set-off





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No.  (2) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah  on 10-14 Ramadan
1420  A.H., corresponding  to 18-22  December  1999 A.D. the Shari'ah  Board decided to give priority to the preparation of a Shari'ah Standard on settlements of debt by way of set-off.

On Tuesday 27 Ramadan  1420  A.H.,  corresponding  to 4 January  2000
A.D,,  one Shari'ah  consultant  was commissioned  to prepare a juristic study and an exposure draft.
In its meeting held in Bahrain  on 18-19 Rabi' I,  1421  A.H.,, corresponding to  20-21  June  2000 A.D.,  the  Sharf'ah  Studies  Committee  discussed  the juristic  study  and  made  certain  amendments   to it.  The  committee  also discussed the exposure draft of the Standard in its meeting  No.  (6)  held in Bahrain on 20-21  Jumada  II,  1421  A.H.,  corresponding  to 18-19  September
2000 A.D.,  and asked  the consultant  to make some amendments  in light of
the comments  made by the members.

In its meeting  No.  (7)  held in Bahrain  on 5-6 Sha'ban  1421  AH., cor• responding  to 1-2  November  2000 A.D., the  Sharf'ah  Studies Committee discussed  the exposure  draft and made some relevant amendments.

The revised exposure  draft of the standard  was presented  to the Shari'ah Board in its meeting  No.  (5)  held in Mecca on 8-12  Ramadan  1421  A.H., corresponding  to  4-8  December   2000  A.D.  The  Shari'ah  Board  made further  amendments  to  the  exposure  draft  of the  standard   and  decided that it should be distributed  to specialists and interested  parties  in order to obtain their comments  in  order to discuss them  in a public hearing.
A public  hearing was held in Bahrain on 4-5 Dhul-Hajjah 1421  A.H., cor•
responding to 27-28 February 2001A.D. The public hearing was attended by



114





Sharf'ah  Standard Na (4):  Settlement of Debts by Set-Off

more than  30  participants  representing central banks,  Institutions,  account• ing firms,  Shari'ah  scholars, academics and others who are interested in this field.  Members of the Shari'ah  Studies Committee responded to the written comments that were sent prior to the public hearing as well as to the oral com• ments that were expressed in the public hearing.

The Sharf'ah Studies Committee  held its meeting No. (8) on 16-17 Dhul• Hajjah  1421  A.H.,  corresponding   to  11-12  March  2001  A.D.,  to  discuss the comments  made about  the exposure  draft.  The  Committee  made the necessary  amendments   in light of both  the  written  comments  that  were received  and oral comments  that took place in the public hearing.

The Sharf'ah  Board  in its meeting No  (6)  held in Al-Madinah  Al-Mun•
awwarah on 25-29 Safar 1422 A.H.,,  corresponding  to 19-23  May 2001  A.D, discussed  the  amendments   made  by  the  Shari'.ah  studies  committee,  and made  necessary  amendments.  The  Shari'ah  Board  unanimously  adopted some of the items  of the standard  and some items were adopted by the ma• jority vote of the members of the Shari'ah  Board, as recorded in the minutes of the meetings of the Shari'ah Board.

The Shari'ah Standards  Review Committee  reviewed the standard  in its
meeting  held in Muharram   1433  A.H.,  corresponding to November  2011
A.D.,  in the State of Qatar,  and proposed  after deliberation  a set of amend• ments (additions, deletions, and rephrasing) as deemed necessary, and then submitted  the proposed amendments  to the Shar'ah  Board for approval  as it  deemed necessary.
In its meeting No.  (38) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah, Kingdom of
Saudi  Arabia on 28  Sha'ban  to  l  Ramadan  1435  A.H.,  corresponding  to 26-
28 June 2014 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the proposed  amendments submitted by the Shari'ah  Standards Review Committee.  After deliberation, the Shari'ah  Board  approved  the necessary amendments,  and the standard
was adopted  in its  current  amended version.









115





Sharf'ah  Standard Na (4):  Settlement of Debts by Set-Off





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


The basis for debt settlements by way of set-off is that it has been practised from  time  immemorial  without  any report  ct disapproval.  Moreover,  set• off is in line with the objectives  of the Shari'ah  as t encourages discharging individuals  from liability ct debt  and set-off is  one way ct discharging debt
liabilities without  involving  futile processes  of debt recovery.

In addition, there is  no  Shari'ah  objection to a set-off taking  place  on demand.  The authority for this permissibility is that  the person  entitled to the  superior  debt  has agreed  to  forgo  the advantage attached to his  debt and the Shari'ah  will not object  to such a gesture.

If set-off is executed  contractually,  it is then based on the prophetic Hadith stating; "Muslims are bound  by the conditions  and agreements  they have made, except a condition  that has rendered the unlawful lawfl or rendered the lawfl unlawful.

















(3) The Hadith  has been  related  by A-Tirmidhi in his "Sunan A1Trmidhi" [3: 634]  edited by Ahmad Muhammad Shakir and others,  Beirut: Dar Ihya'  Al-Turath Al-'Arabi. Also, it has been related  by Al-Bayhaqi  in his Sunan  AI-Bayhaqf" [7:  248];  and AI-Manawi, "Fayd Al-Qadir" [6:  272], Egypt: AI-Maktabah  AI-Kubra,  1356 A.H.



116





Sharf'ah  Standard Na (4):  Settlement of Debts by Set-Off





Appendix (C)
Definitions


Debt and Loan
A debt is  any liability that is  not in terms of a specified or defined item, whatever the cause of its establishment,  i.e.  whether its origin  is in cash or in a commodity, or in a particular  described benefit such as the benefit of using particular  things or services cf persons.  For instance, the consideration  in defi erred  sales and loans  is  described as a debt.

The relationship between a loan and a debt is that the latter is more general than the former,  since every loan  is  described  as a debt but the converse is not true.  Not all  debts originate  from a loan.  In this sense,  a loan  is  but one cause of the creation of debt.

Due Debt

A due debt  is  a debt that  is  immediately  payable or that  is  payable on the  creditor's  demand,  whether  on its  original  due  date or,  if it  has been rescheduled  and deferred,  on its  rescheduled  due date.

Deferred Debt
A def erred  debt is  a debt the payment  thereof is  due at a certain time in the future,  and it may also be due in periodic  instalments  over time.

Description

A description is  a condition that distinguishes particular specimens of the same species from one other.  For examples,  conditions such as good quality and poor quality, or mortgage of security or personal guarantees,  letters of guarantee and the freezing of the amount of cheques for payment which are attached to the debt are considered descriptions.
Ibra'  (discharge)
An act by a person to discharge another  person from a liability (owed by
the latter  to the former)



117





Sh ari'ah  Standard  Na (4):  Settlement  of Debts by Set-off

Reconciliation (Sulh)

An agreement  to solve dispute between parties. Iqalah  (Mutual  Rescission  of Contract)
Revocation  of a contract  and  cancellation  of its  effects  with  mutual
consent  of both  parties.

















































118

























Shari'ah Standard No.  (5)



Guarantees

(Revised Standard)












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page
Pref: ilce...................................................................................................     123
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        124
1.   Scope of the Standard..............................................................................        124
2.  General Rulings on Guarantees..............................................................        124
3,  Personal Guarantees .......osss.sos.sos.sssssssssssssssssssssssoos.so.sass.s.sos.so.o...                             15


5.  Cases cf Achieving the Objectives cf Securities...................................        129
6.  Some Contemporary Applications of Securities  ..........a.a.a......    129
7.  Date cf Issuance  cf the Standard...................................................................        134
Adoption  cf the Standard......................................................................        135
Appendices
Appendix  (a):   Brief History f the Preparation of the Standard.............         136
Appendix  (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard....................................         138
Appendix  (c):   Definitions.............................................................................         146























121








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE  ALL-MERCIFUL,  THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all his companions





Preface


The  aim  of this  standard   is  to  outline  the  Shari'ah  rules  governing guarantees,  and  to clarify  the  forms  of guarantees   that  are  permissible or prohibited.  It also outlines  some  significant  modern   applications  of guarantees   as employed  by  Islamic  financial  Institutions  (Institution/ Institutions).(






























(1) The word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer,  in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



123





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (5):  Guaran tees





Statement of the Standard


I. Scope  of the Standard

This standard covers securities  (Guarantees) intended to secure obligations and protect debts against procrastination  and default. Such securities may take the  form  of written  documents, attestations,  personal  guarantees, mortgages, cheques and promissory  notes. The standard  also explains the permissible and prohibited forms of securities. It also intends to distinguish between liabilities and the assets held on trust.

The standard  does not cover guarantees  against torts.

2. General  Rulings  on Guarantees

2/1   Permissibility of guarantees and their  relevance  to contracts

2/1/1  A contract of guarantee is permissible in contracts of exchange, e.g.  a contract  of sale,  or contract  of  rights,  e.g.  right of intel• lectual  property.  Such  a guarantee  contract  does not affect the permissibility of the original contract  in which  it is  required.  It is, moreover,  permissible to stipu1ate  a guarantee  into the body of an original at one time,  because guarantee  is  appropriate  to, or relevant  in, contracts.

2/1/2  There is  no objection in Shari'ah  to include a number of guaran• tees in one contract, such as  incorporating a personal guarantee together with a mortgage of security in the same contract.

2/2  Guarantees in trust (fiduciary)  contracts

2/2/1  It is not permissible  to stipulate  in trust  (fiduciary)  contracts, e.g. agency  contracts  or contracts  of deposits,  that a personal guarantee  or mortgage  of security  be  produced,  because such a stipulation  is  against the nature of trust  (fiduciary)  contracts, unless such a stipulation  is  intended  to cover cases of miscon•



124





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (5):  Guarant ees

duct,  negligence  or breach of conditions  or stipulations.  The prohibition   against  seeking  a guarantee  in trust  contracts  is more stringent in Musharakah  and Mudarabah  contracts, since it is  not permitted  to require  from a manager  in the Mudara• bah or the Musharakah  contract  or an investment  agent or one of the partners  in these contracts  to guarantee  the capital,  or to promise  a guaranteed  profit. Moreover,  it is  not permissible for these contracts  to be marketed  or operated  as a guaranteed investment.

2/2/2  It is  not permissible to combine agency and personal guarantees in one contract  at the same time  (i.e.  the same party acting in the capacity of an agent on one hand and acting as a guarantor on the other hand),  because such a combination  conflicts with the  nature  of these  contracts.  In addition,  a guarantee  given by a party acting as an agent in respect ct an investment  turns the  transaction   into  an interest-based   loan,  since the  capital Of  the  investment  is guaranteed   in addition  to  the  proceeds
ct the  investment,   (i.e.   as though   the  investment  agent  had
taken  a loan  and  repaid  it  with  an  additional  sum  which  is tantamount to Riba).  But if a guarantee  is  not stipulated  in the agency contract  and the agent voluntarily provides a guarantee to his clients independently  of the agency contract, the agent becomes a guarantor  in a different  capacity from that of agent. In this case,  such an agent will remain liable as guarantor  even if he is  discharged  from acting as agent.

2/3  Guaranteeing existing leased  properties

The  lessor  bears  the  risk associated  with  the  leased  property  and the  lessee  holds  it  on a trust  basis.  Hence,  it  is   not  permissible  for the  lessor  to  stipulate  in the  lease  contract  that  the  lessee  provide
a guarantee  or  mortgage  of security,  etc.,  so that  he may use it  to recover  the  amount   ct  the  lease  rental  if the leased  property   is damaged, unless such a stipulation is restricted to cases of misconduct, negligence or breach of contract.  Therefore,  the lessor  is liable  for the consequences of any damage to the leased  property  that is  not caused



125





Shan'ah  Standar d No. (5):  Guarant ees

by the misconduct  or negligence of the lessee,  and is  responsible  for any related insurance  expenses.  The lessor  also bears the expense  of any major  maintenance   work required  to  keep the leased property in the condition  necessary to provide the contractual  benefits under the lease.

2/4 Written documentation and attestation

2/4/1  Documentation  in writing is  recommended  by Shari'ah, whether such  documentation  is   in  the form  of ordinary   (private)  or official documents.   However, customary  practice  is  applicable in the drawing  up of such documents  and in determining the documents  that are relevant as proof (or have evidential value). It is prohibited  to forge  documents  or to conceal their contents or to destroy them so as to bring about the loss ct other peoples' rights.

2/4/2 Attestation in financial transactions is recommended  by Shari'ah.
It is also commendable,  and in case of necessity  it is  obligatory, to give testimony.  On the other hand, perjury  is prohibited  and is one of the major sins.

2/4/3 I is  not  permitted  to scribe  or  witness  acts  prohibited  by Shari'ah,  such  as certifying  or witnessing borrowing on  the basis  of interest.

3.  Personal Guarantees

3/1   Permissibility and types of personal guarantee

3/1/1  It is permissible for an Institution to stipulate  that a customer should  provide  one  or  more  guarantors to  secure  the  debts owed by the customer.

3/1/2  Personal  guarantees  are divided  into  two  types.  One  type is a guarantee  where the guarantor  has a right of recourse  to the debtor, and this guarantee  is offered at the request  or with the consent  of the debtor. The other  type is a non-recourse guar• antee, which is  offered  voluntarily by a third party without  the debtor's request or consent  (voluntary  guarantee).



126





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (5):  Guarant ees

3/1/3 An  Institution  is  not  entitled  to  guarantee  financial   com• mitments without  a right  of recourse to the  debtor,  i.e.  to be a non-recourse  guarantor,  unless  the  Institution  is already authorised by its shareholders and  investors  to  make  dona•
tions  or to perform  acts of benevolence.

3/1/4  It is  permissible to fix the duration  af a personal  guarantee.  It is also permissible  to set a ceiling on the amount  to be guaranteed and it is permissible  that the personal  guarantee be restricted by, or be contingent upon, a condition. In addition, it is  permissible that such a guarantee  be made contingent  upon  a future event, for example, by fixing a future  date at which liability will com• mence  and,  in this  case,  the  guarantor   may validly withdraw the guarantee, by notifying the creditor, before the prospective obligation  to be guaranteed  arises.

3/1/5  It is  not permissible to take any remuneration  whatsoever for providing a personal  guarantee  per se, Or to pay commission for obtaining  such a guarantee. The guarantor is, however, entitled to daim any expenses  actually  incurred   during  the period  ct a personal   guarantee,   and  the  Institution  is  not  obliged  to inquire  as to how the guarantee   produced  has been  obtained by the customer.  [see  item 7/1/1  and  7/1/2)]
3/2  Guaranteeing unknown  (Majhul) and  future debts

A valid guarantee  may be given fee debts,  the exact amount  of which is  unknown.  Similarly,  a valid guarantee  may be given for a debt that will arise in  the future.  However,  it is  permissible  for the guarantor to withdraw  such a guarantee  before a future  debt is  actually created, after notifying  the  person  having  interest  in  the  guarantee.  This  is
called a market (business)  guarantee,"  or a guarantee of contractual
obligation."  An example  of this  type is  a third  party's  guarantee  to refund  the  price to the  buyer  if it appears  that  the sold commodity belongs to a person  other than the seller and this guarantee  is known as Daman al-Dark  (dealers/business misrepresentation  guarantee).



127





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (5):  Guarant ees

3/3  The effect of a personal guarantee

3/3/1  The creditor  is  entitled  to claim the amount  of his debt from either  the  debtor  or the  guarantor   and  he  has the  choice  of claiming his right from either of them.  However, the guarantor is   entitled  to  arrange  the  order  of liability,  for  example,  by stipulating  (at the conclusion  of the contract of guarantee)  that the creditor  shall first claim payment  from the principal  debtor and  that  the  creditor  is  entitled  to  recourse  to the  guarantor for payment  only  if the  principal  debtor  refuses  to  fulfil his obligation.
3/3/2  If the creditor discharges the debtor from the debt, the guarantor is also discharged automatically from  his liability..  However, if the  creditor  discharges   the  guarantor  from  liability,  the debtor  remains  in debt.  If the  guarantor  secures a discount that  results  in paying  an amount  less  than  the  original  debt, the guarantor is entitled to  recover  only the  amount  he has actually   paid  to  the  creditor;  he  cannot   demand   that  the debtor  pay the debt in full ignoring the discount.  This rule is intended to prevent  a procedure being  used  that  potentially leads to Riha.  However, if the guarantor reaches an agreement with  the  creditor   to  settle  the  debt  using  as consideration a commodity of a different type from that in which the original debt was designated,  the  guarantor is  entitled to recover  the exact amount  of the commodity provided  as consideration for the debt, or the exact amount  of the debt,  whichever  is less.

3/3/3  It is permissible for a personal  guarantee  contract  to be desig• nated  in a separate  contract. It can also be concluded togeth• er with,  or before,  or after,  the  conclusion   of the  contract  of a credit  transaction.
3/3/4  If an Institution  manages transactions  on the basis ofMudarabah or Musharakah  or investment agency, it is not permitted for it to guarantee the fluctuations of currency exchange rates so that the investors  will recover their investment  shares irrespective of the behaviour of the currency market. Such a guarantee is prohibited



128





Shari'ah  Standar d No.  (5)  Guaran tees

because it is tantamount to the Mudarib or partner or investment agent guaranteeing  the capital  of other  partners  or  investors, which  is prohibited  by Shari'.ah.  [see  items  2/21  and 2/2/2]

3/3/5  If the contract  of a credit transaction stipulates  that the debtor shall provide  a guarantor and the debtor  fails  to provide  one, the Institution is entitled  to initiate legal action to force him to provide  a guarantor or to terminate  the contract.

4. Mortgage  (Rahn)

It is  to make a financial  asset or so tied to a debt so that the asset or its value is used for repayment of the debt in case of default.  [see  Shari'ah Standard No.  (39) on Mortgage]

5. Cases  of Achieving the Objectives of Securities

5/1   Bringing forward future instalments in case of default  on payment

It is  permissible  to include a term in a debt contract  to the effect that, ifthe debtor defaults on the payment of one or more instalments, some or all of the future instalments shall fall  due immediately,  provided the default was not caused by  unforeseeable  intervening  events or force majeure.  However,  this term shall not be effective until the debtor has been served with  a  reminder  notice  and after a reasonable period  of time has elapsed.

5/2  Termination of a sale on deferred payment terms in case of failure
to pay

The seller is entitled,  in a contract  of sale on a def rred payment basis, to stipulate that if the buyer fails to pay the price within a certain period of time,  the  seller is  entitled to revoke the contract  and repossess the sold asset without  recourse to the courts.

6. Some Contemporary Applications of Securities

6/1  Letters of guarantee

6/1/1  It is  not permissible  to take  remuneration for  issuing  a letter of guarantee,  whether it is  with cover or without  cover,  if the remuneration  is  intended   as consideration  for the  guarantee



129





Shan'ah  Standar d No. (5):  Guarant ees

per  se, since  the  amount  guaranteed and  the  duration  of the guarantee   are usually  taken into  consideration  in computing remuneration.

6/1/2 Asking an applicant for a letter of guarantee to bear administrative expenses incurred  in issuing a letter  of guarantee  of either type (i.e. preliminary or final) is permissible  in Shari'ah, provided the remuneration for such expenses do not exceed the commission that others would charge for such services. Where full or partial cover is  provided,  it is  permissible,  in estimating  the expenses for issuing  a letter  of guarantee,  to take into account  anything that will reflect the  actual  service to be rendered  in providing a cover for the transaction.

6/1/3  It is not permitted  for the Institution to issue a letter of guarantee in favour of an applicant  who will use it to acquire  an interest• based loan  or to conclude  a prohibited  transaction.

6/2 Documentary credit

It is  a written  undertaking by a bank (known  as the issuer)  given to the seller (the beneficiary)  as per the buyer's (applicant's or orderer's) instruction  or  is  issued  by  the  bank for  its own  use,  undertaking to pay up to a specified  amount  (in  cash or through   acceptance or discounting  of a bill of exchange),  within  a certain  period  of time, provided  that the seller present documents for the goods conforming to the instructions.

In brief, a documentary  credit  is  an undertaking  by  a bank to  pay subject to conformity  of the documents  to the contractual instructions, [see  Shari'ah  Standard No.  (14)  on Documentary Credit]

6/3  Use of cheques or promissory notes

There  is  no Shari'ah objection to obtaining cheques  or promissory notes from the debtor  (unless not allowed by law) as a means to force the debtor  to make timely payment  of instalments  in cash,  whereby
if the  debtor pays on time  such  cheques  or promissory notes  shall
be returned  to  him,  and  in the  event  of default  on payment   they



130





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (5):  Guarant ees

may be produced  for  recovery. The party providing  these  cheques or promissory notes as security is entitled  to obtain an undertaking from the Institution  that they will be used only for  timely recovery of its  due debts without any addition.

6/4  Insurance  for doubtful or bad debts

It is permissible  to subscribe  to an Islamic  insurance coverage  as security  for debt  obligations  and it is not permissible  that debts  be insured on a conventional   insurance  basis.

6/5  Freezing cash deposits  (blocking  withdrawals)

6/5/1  In  order  to  secure  the  future  payment  ct debts  on  a single payment  or an instalment  basis,  it  is permissible  for  the  In• stitution  to stipulate, that it is entitled to freeze the customer's investment  account, or to revoke his right to withdraw  money from  such  an account  entirely or to block an amount  in the account equivalent  to the debt, which is  the pref zrred option. Nevertheless, the customer  remains entitled to share profits on the whole balance  ct the  investment  account  after deducting the Institution's  share for  acting as a Mudarb.

6/5/2  In  a credit  transaction,  it  is  not permitted  for  the  Institution to  stipulate  a right  to  freeze the  customer's  current  account. However, a stipulation af this kind is allowed where the customer has freely, willingly and absolutely agreed to his current account to be  frozen.

6/6 Third  party  guarantees (voluntary  undertakings to compensate an investment loss)

It is permissible  for a third  party, other than  the Mudarib  or invest• ment agent or one ct the partners,  to undertake voluntarily  that he will compensate   the  investment   losses  of the  party, to whom  the undertaking is  given, provided  this guarantee  is not linked  in any manner  to the Mudarabah financing  contract or investment  agen• cy contract.



131





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (5):  Guaran tees

6/7 Underwriting the subscription of shares issued (subscription guar•
antee)

6/7/1  It is permissible  for the  Institution  to  undertake  that  it  will underwrite the remaining  shares offered for subscription  after the expiry of the offer period, provided  the shares are under• written  at  the  offer value without  any consideration  for the underwriting per se.

6/7/2 'The underwriter  is entitled to receive consideration  for a service it provides other than the guarantee, such as conducting a feasi• bility study  or marketing the shares.

6/8  Guarantees in tenders,  security deposits  inMurabahah transactions and 'Arboun  (Earnest  Money)

6/8/1   It is permissible to obtain guarantees for tenders and this includes both  the  amounts  paid  for  participating   in the  bid  (primary cash security for participating  in the bid) and the amounts paid when the contract is awarded to the successful bidder (final cash security providing  evidence of ability to complete the project). Such  amounts  shall be considered as being held on trust  by the
offeror of the  bid on behalf of the successful bidder,  and  are
not viewed as 'Arboun  (Earnest  Money).  Hence,  such amounts are recoverable  if they  are  intermingled  with  other  amounts of money  (i.e.  irrespective  of any unwanted  circumstances). Moreover,  it  is   not permissible  to confiscate such  amounts  of money, except in compensation  for an equivalent  amount  of financial  damage  actually sustained  in the  tendering  process. Such  amounts  may be  invested in the benefit ct the customer
with  his  consent,   unless  he  requests  it  to  be   credited  to  his
current  account.

6/8/2  It  is  permissible  for the  Institution,  in the  case  of a unilateral binding promise, to take a sum of money called  Hamish Jiddiyyah (security deposit)  from the purchase orderer  (customer) as se• curity for his promise.  'This sum of money is held on trust, not as



132





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (5):  Guaran tees

'Arboun, because no contract has been established. The rules set out in item  6/8/1  apply here.  Where the customer fails to honour his binding promise, the Institution is not permitted to retain the security deposit as such. Instead, the Institution's rights are lim• ited to deducting the amount ct any damage  actually incurred as a result  of the breach,  namely  the difference  between   the cost  of:  the  item  to  the  Institution  and  its  selling  price  to a third  party.

6/8/3  It is  permissible  to take  'Arboun from  a buyer or lessee  when a sale  or lease  contract  is  concluded,  on condition  that,  if the contract  is  not terminated  within the specified period  during which the option to terminate  the contract remains valid, such an amount will be considered as part of the consideration  for the contract and, if the buyer or lessee fails to perform  the contract within  this  period,  the seller or lessor  is  entitled  to retain the amount.  It is,  however,  preferable  that  the  Institution  should refund to the customer  any balance remaining  after deducting from the 'Arboun  the amount of any damage actually sustained by it.
6/9  Priority  right of recovery and the right to follow up

6/9/1  The  Institution  is   entitled  to  recover  first  its  tangible  items that  were sold to  or manufactured  for  a customer  and  have not been paid for and can be identified  among the assets of the customer.

6/9/2  The Institution is entitled to protect the integrity of the subject of a guarantee,  such as a mortgaged asset,  and pursue a legal  action against misusing it  if; it is  established that the person holding it is using it in a manner that may lead  to losses to be borne by the Institution.

6/9/3  The rights  of the parties holding mortgages of security shall  be given priority over the rights of the parties who are unsecured. [see  Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (39)]



133





Shan'ah  Standar d No. (5):  Guarant ees

6/9/4  In the event of bankruptcy or liquidation,  the parties  in charge of the liquidation have a preferential right or priority  over other creditors  in recovering  their  rights; i.e. the cost of any services provided  in the process  of liquidation.  [see  Sharf'ah  Standard No, (43) on Insolvency]

7. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 29 Safar 1422 A.H., corresponding to 23 May
2001  A.D.












































134





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (5):  Guaran tees





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'.ah Standard on Guarantees was adopted  by the Shari'ah Board in its meeting No.  (6)  held  on 25-29  Safar  1422 A.H., corre• sponding to 19-23  May  2001  A.D.













































135





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (5):  Guarantees





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In  its meeting  No   (2)   held  in Mecca on  10-14  Ramadan   1420  A.H., corresponding  to 18-22  December  1999  A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Board  decided to give priority  to the preparation  of a Sharl'ah  Standard  on Guarantees.

On Tuesday 27  Ramadan  1420 A.H.,  corresponding to 4 January 2000
A.D.,  a Shari'ah  consultant was commissioned to prepare  a juristic study and an exposure draft
In its meeting held in Bahrain on 18-19 Rabi' I,  1421  A.H., corresponding to  20-21  June  2000 A.D.,  the  Shari'ah  Committee   discussed  the juristic study and  made certain  amendments to it.  The committee  also discussed the exposure  draft of  the Standard  in its meeting  No.  (6)  held in Bahrain on 20-21  Jumada  II,   1421  A.H.,  corresponding  to  18-19  September  2000
A.D.,  and asked the consultant  to make some amendments in light of the comments  made by the members.

In its meeting No. (7)  held in Bahrain on 5-6 Sha'ban  1421  A.H., corre• sponding  to  1-2 November  2000 A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Committee  discussed the exposure  draft and made some  relevant amendments.

The revised exposure draft of the standard was presented to the Shari'ah Board in its meeting  No.  (5)  held in Mecca on 8-12 Ramadan  1421  A.H., corresponding  to  4-8  December   2000  A.D.  The  Shari'.ah  Board  made further  amendments   to  the  exposure  draft  of  the  standard  and  decided that it  should be distributed  to specialists and interested  parties in order to obtain their comments  in order to discuss them in a public hearing.

A public hearing  was  held in Bahrain  on 4-5 Dhul-Hajjah  1421  A.H., corresponding to 27-28 February 2001  A.D. The public hearing was attended



136





Shan'ah  Standar d No. (5):  Guarant ees

by more than 30 participants representing central  banks, Institutions, accounting firms, Shari'ah scholars,  academics and others who are interested in this  field.  Members  of the Shari'ah studies  committee  responded  to the written comments  that were sent prior to the public hearing as well as to the oral comments that were expressed in the  public hearing.

The  Shari'ah  Committee  held  its  meeting   No.  (8)   on  16-17  Dhul• Hajjah   1421  A.H.,  corresponding to  11-12  March  2001  A.D,,  to discuss the comments made  about  the exposure  draft. The  committee made  the necessary  amendments in light  cf both  the written comments that  were received  and oral  comments  that took  place in the public  hearing.

The Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. (6) held in Al-Madinah Al• Munawwarah  on 25-29 Safar  1422  A.H.,  corresponding to  19-23  May 2001
A.D., discussed the amendments made by the Shari'ah Committee, and made
necessary  amendments.  The Shari'ah Board unanimously  adopted  some  of the items of the standard  and some items were adopted  by the majority  vote of the  members  of the  Shari'ah  Board,  as recorded  in the  minutes  of the meetings of the Shari'ah  Board.

The  Shari'ah  Standards  Review  Committee  reviewed  the  standard  in its  meeting  held  in  Muharram  1433  A.H.,  corresponding  to  November
2011  A.D.,  in the  State  of Qatar,  and  proposed  after deliberation  a set of
amendments (additions, deletions,  and  rephrasing) as deemed  necessary,, and  then  submitted the  proposed amendments  to the  Shari'ah  Board  for approval  as it deemed  necessary.
In its meeting  No.  (38) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah, Kingdom
cf Saudi Arabia on 28 Shaban - I Ramadan  1435 A.H., corresponding to 26-
28 June 2014 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed  the proposed  amendments submitted  by the Shari'ah Standards  Review Committee. After deliberation, the Shari'ah  Board  approved  necessary; amendments,  and the standard  was
adopted  in its current  amended  version.









137





Shari'ah  Standar d No,  (5)  Guaran tees





Appendix  (B)

The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Permissibility of Guarantees and  Its Relevance  to Contracts

The basis of the permissibility of stipulating  guarantees  in contracts  is that it protects  property, which is  one af the objectives of Shari'ah.  The other authorities  mentioned  in the standard  in support  of each kind of guarantee can be cited  as authority  for the permissibility of guarantees in contracts.

Guarantees in Trust  Contracts

Assets held  on trust  must  be returned  to  their  owners  in the  manner in which  they were received  and in their  original  physical  state  promptly after the  owners  demand  their  return.  Allah,  the  Almighty,  says  {"Allah doth command you to render back your trusts to those to whom they are due}.   Since such  assets are not subject to exchange, they are purposely meant  either  for custody  with  permission  to  use them,  such as assets  on deposit,  or for charitable  acts,  such  as  a loan  of tangible assets.  Therefore, the  persons  holding  such  assets  are considered  by the  owners  from  the beginning as capable of returning  them to their owners on demand, making them trustees,  and as  a principle of Shari'ah,  a trustee  is  not held liable (for loss of,  or damage  to,  an asset held on  trust),  except in circumstances  of misconduct, negligence or violation of the conditions  agreed upon,  because in other circumstances  it  is inconsistent  with the fundamental  principle of trusts  for a trustee to be held liable.

Written  Documentation and Attestation
Written  documentation  is recommended  by Shari'ah.  This is  the opinion of the  majority  of Fuqaha,  in  contrast  to Ibn  Hazm  who  argued  that written documentation   is an obligation  (i.e.  if one did not put his financial

(2)  [AI-Nisa'  (Women):  58].



138





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (5): Guarantees

transactions  in  writing  he  has committed   a  sin)  relying  on  the  literal meaning  of the Qura nic  verse:  ""O ye  who believe!  When you deal with each other,  in  transactions  involving future obligations  in a fixed period time, reduce them to writing}and the Quranic  Verse:  {"Disdain  not to
reduce to writing your contract for a future period,  whether it  be small
or big    The  majority  of Fuqaha  have also inferred  that  this  verse itself excluded written  documentation in the cases of trustworthiness,  as the last part of the following verse  says:  {"And if one ofyou deposits a thing on trust with another,  let the  trustee  (faithfully)  discharge his trust and left  him fear Allah his Lord."}

It must  be  noted  that  customary   practice  is  the  basis in determining the form and  evidential  value of written  documentation,  because  Shari'ah did not specify a particular  manner  of writing to be considered.  As for the permissibility  of attestation  as documentation, the authority for that is the following  Qura 'nic  verse:   {"And  get out two witnesses,  out of your own men.  And if there are not two men, then a man and two women, such as
ye choose,  for witnesses, so that if one of them errs,  the other can remind
her),9

The  evidential  value  of attestation  according  to  traditional   Fuqaha  is stronger than  that of written  documentation.  But in modern  times,  things have changed  so that  some  laws  rely  on witnesses  only  in a very limited number of cases and paramount  importance  is given  to written documentary evidence.

Personal Guarantees

Permissibility of personal guarantees

Personal guarantees derive their permissibility  from the Qura 'n, Sunn ah, consensus  and reasoning.  In the Qura n, Allah, the Almighty, says:{"They said:  'We miss the great beaker of the king; for him who produces  it, is (the reward of) a camel  load; I will be bound  by it"), In Sunnah, there  is  the
Hadith  narrated  by Salamah  Ibn Al-Akwa,  who  said:  "We  were with the

(3)  [AI  Baqarah  (The  Cow):  282] (4)  [AI  Baqarah  (The Cow):  282] (5)  [AI  Baqarah  (The  Cow):  282]. (6)  [Yusuf(Joseph):  72].



139





Shari'ah  Standard  No,  (5)  Guarantees

Prophet  (peace be upon  him) when  a deceased person  was  brought.  'They said,  O Prophet of Allah, perform  prayers on him.' He (peace be upon him) said,  'Has the deceased  left anything?' They said,  'NO.' He  (peace  be  upon him) said, 'Is he  in debt?' They said, 'Three dinars.  He said,  'Perform prayers
on  your companion'  Abu Qatadah  said,  O  Messenger  of Allah,  perform
prayer on him, and I am responsible  for his debt!  Then the Prophet  (peace be upon  him) performed prayers  on him" In another  text of the Hadith, he (Qatadah)  said:  "I guarantee  (to  pay) his debt?«9

The Fuqaha are unanimous  on the permissibility  of personal guarantees. Moreover, the need of people for personal  guarantees  to facilitate dealings with each other had also made them legitimate, particularly  in the case of customers  who lack a good credit record. In addition, personal  guarantees encourage performance and prevent the contract  from being breached  and this  security also justifies  their permissibility.
The  objection  to taking  consideration  for personal  guarantees  is that giving  a guarantee   is  one  of the  charitable  acts  that  should  be  offered without  consideration, and this ruling has generated  consensus  among the Fuqaha.  Moreover, a personal  guarantee  indicates  a readiness  to give away the amount  of a loan,  which  means  that  the guarantor will pay the  loan (if the principal  debtor  fails to pay) and  have recourse  to the guaranteed person  for fulfilment.  Hence, it is not permissible  to take consideration for a guarantee, because  it is not permissible to take consideration for giving away the amount  of the loan  itself,  since such consideration is considered to be Riba.
Guaranteeing unknown and future debts

The Shari'ah  basis  for the permissibility  of guaranteeing  the  unknown
is  the  general  meaning  of the  Hadith:  "The guarantor  is   liable."  because

(7)  Related   by AI-Bukhari  in his "Sahih"  [2:  800], Dar bn  Kathir and Yamamah.
(8)  "Sunan AI-Nasa'1" [7:  317];  "Sunan Ibn Majal,  [2:  804];  and Al-Bayhaqi  in AI-Sunan
Al-Kubra" [4: 95].
(9)  The Hadith  has been related  by Ahmad,  Abu Dawud, and A!-Tirmidhi:  AI-Darari Al• Mudiyyah"  [1:   399],   Dar  Al-Jil;  bn  Mapah  in his "Sunan  Ibn Majah"  [2:  804],  Dar  Al• Fikr; and A!Bayhaqi in A!-Sunan A1-Kbra"  [6:  72], Maktabat  Dar Al-Baz.



140





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (5):  Guarant ees

this  Hadith   makes  no  distinction  between   guaranteeing the known  and the unknown since there  is  no harm  or element  of dispute  arising  due  to uncertainty here, because  the unknown transaction guaranteed will become certain  and known,  and the guarantor will know,  after the debt is  incurred, the actual obligation he undertakes. Another authority for the permissibility of guaranteeing what  is  not known  is  the  Quranic verse:  {"..for  him who
produces it, is (the reward of) a camel load and I will be bound by it.0
Here,  the guarantor guaranteed a camel  load  although  it was not yet a debt.

The  evidence  for  the  creditor's   right  to  demand   payment   from either the debtor  or the guarantor is  that the debt is  established  as liability of both cf them,  hence  the  right  to  demand   payment   from either  cf them.  The permissibility for stipulating that  the creditor has first to ask  for payment from the principal debtor  and that  he  may ask the  guarantor for  payment only if the  debtor fails  to pay, is  based  on an opinion  in the  Maliki school
of law  and it  is  also an opinion  of the Hanafis.   These  opinions  argued
that if the debtor  is solvent then  demanding payment  from the guarantor is pointless,  unless the debtor  refuses to pay.  So,  the requirement that payment be first sought  from the debtor  has a Sharl'ah  basis as well as being a case of adherence  to a principle cf natural  justice.

Bringing Forward Future Instalments  in Case of Default in Payment
The basis for this condition  is the Hadith of the Prophet  (peace be upon him):   "Muslims are  bound   by  the  conditions they  made, and because payment on a deferred  basis is  the  right  of the debtor,  and the debtor  may
choose to pay before time and relinquish the deferral of the date of payment entirely.  If this is the case, the date of payment may also be based  on default so  as  to  strengthen the  collectibility of the debt  and secure  payment  on time.  The basis of the rule enabling  the creditor to demand payment of all
instalments in the event of default,  instead  of waiting  until each instalment


(10)  [Yusuf (Joseph):  72].  "1 will  be bound by it means being a guarant or
(I1)  bn  Rushd,  AI- Bayan  Wa A!Tahsil"  [1:  291]. (12)  "Bada ? AI- Sana r [7:  2423].
(13)  Related  by Al-Bayhaqi   in  4l-Sunan  AL-Kbra" [6:  79],  Maktabat  Dar Al-Baz;  Al• Daraqutni in his  "Sunan  Al-Daraqutnr  [10:  27],  Dar Al-Ma'rifah;  Ibn  Abu Shaybah in his  "Musannaf [4:  450],  Maktabat Al-Rushd;  and Al Tahawi  in Sharh  Maani Al• Athar" [4:  90],  Dar AI-Kutub  Al-'Ilmiyyah.



141





Shan'ah  Standar d No. (5):  Guarant ees

is  due,  is  the  possibility  that  during  the  period  of delay in payment  the debtor  may find  a means  to conceal his assets and  claim insolvency. 'The permissibility   of this  condition   is  confirmed   by the  Resolution  No.  (51) issued  by the International Islamic Fiqh Academy.

Termination of a Sale on Deferred  Payment  Terms in Case of Failure to Pa

The basis for this  is  that  the seller has consented  to deferred  payment only if it will not lead  to a loss  af what is  due to him.  This is  the opinion  of the majority  of Fuqaha, as opposed  to the Hanafis who have confined the creditor's  right to litigation,  unless he has stipulated  the right to terminate the contract  and "Muslims are bound  by conditions  they made."

Guarantees and  Their Modern Applications

Letters of Guarantee

The basis  of the rule that no remuneration  may be taken  for  a guarantee per se is that it  is a surety, and as such  it is one of the contracts of charity. since it involves a readiness to give away the amount of a loan for no consideration. The majority of Fuqaha agree that it is  prohibited  to take consideration  for guarantee. However, issuing the letter of guarantee  is  a service that justifies charging fees

The  prohibition  of issuing  a letter  of guarantee  for  unlawful  acts  is analogous  to  the  prohibition  of giving  assistance   in committing  a sin. The Hadith:  "Allah  curses the one who gives Riba  and  the one who  takes  it and  the one who  writes its contract and  the  two witnesses  involved» also supports  this ruling,  because the personal  guarantor  has a stronger  role in
establishing  and recovering  a debt than  the writer  of the contract  and the witness  mentioned in the Hadith.
Documentary credits

The basis for the permissibility  ofi charging foes  for a documentary  credit is  that issuing  a documentary  credit is  a service performed  in  the interest of the applicant for the documentary  credit,  for which the Bank has the right to charge fees

(14)  Related   by Muslim   in his "Sahi"  [3:  1219],  Dar Ihya'  Al Turath Al-'Arabi; and the five
compilers of Hadith,  and see: Al-Shawkani   Nay! Al-Awtar" [5: 296], Dar Al-Jil.



142





Shari'ah  Standar d No  (5):  Guarant ees

Use of cheques  or promissory notes

The Shari'ah  basis for obtaining  cheques or promissory notes from the debtor  as a guarantee  is the general  sources on the permissibility  of guar• antees in general.
Insurance for debts

Islamic  insurance   is  based  on  the  principle  of donation,  and  Gharar is  tolerable  in such conditions.  In Islamic insurance,  the  instalments  that are paid are provided  within  a framework  of donations  organised  for the mutual benefit of the contributors to the insurance  fund. The permissibility of Islamic insurance  is  confirmed by the resolutions  issued  by the Islamic Fiqh Academy of the World Muslim League'and the International  Islamic
Fiqh Academy of the Organisation of Islamic Conference."   Although this form  cf insurance  fills  within  the meaning  cf a guarantee, the  guarantee here is  not provided  in return  for conditional  consideration  as such,  hence the  permissibility   of  subscribing   to  an  Islamic  insurance   coverage  as security for doubtful  or bad debts.

Freezing cash deposits

The basis for the permissibility of stipulating a right to freeze acustomer's investment account is  the permissibility of pledging funds, in addition  to the fact that the purpose  behind such freezing is  to be able  to agree on a set-off if it appears that the pledgor  of the balance  is in debt to the bank. It is  a form of mortgage to secure  a possible future debt. The basis for the prohibition  of stipulating a right to freeze a customer's current  account is  that such a right would be tantamount to a combination of a sale on def erred payment terms and a loan transaction;  ie,, it amounts  to a def erred sale with  a condition to provide  a loan, which is prohibited  by Shari'ah

Third party guarantees

The basis for third party guarantees is that they are a promise to volunteer to remedy a loss  of capital  under  an investment  contract with a party other

(15)   The First Session,  Resolution  No.  (5). (16)  Resolution  No.  9 (9/2).



143





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (5):  Guarant ees

than the volunteer.  This  is a permissible act as a volunteer,  as is evidenced in the Holy Qura'n:  {"No ground (of complaint)  can there be against such as do right,} A resolution passed by the International  Islamic Fiqh Academy states as follows:

"There is  no Shari'ah  objection to mention  in the prospectus  of the issue or in the documents  of Muqaradah  (Mudarabah)  bonds the  promise  of a third  party,  who  is   independent  personally  and  in terms  of financial liability  from  the  two  parties  to  the  contract,  to  volunteer  an  amount of money  for  no  consideration  to be  allocated  to  make  good  a loss  on a particular project. However, this  is  circumscribed with a condition  that such a promise should be an obligation independent  from the Mudarabah contract.  In other words,  the third  party's performance  of his obligation should  not  be  a condition  for the  enforcement  of the  contract  and  the conditions  and liabilities  of the parties  to the contract.  As such, holders of the bonds or the manager of the Mudarabah  are not entitled to claim that they may fail to honour their obligations relating to their contracts because the volunteer failed to fulfil his  promise because the performance  of their obligations takes into consideration the promise to volunteers

Underwriting the subscription  of shares issued

If such  underwriting  is  offered without consideration,  it is  considered as a personal guarantee for no consideration,  and this is permissible in Shari'ah. However,  if it is  for consideration, the basis for its prohibition  is what we have mentioned  in respect to taking a commission  for a guarantee.  [see  item  4/1]

Guarantees in tenders,  security  deposits  in Murabahah transactions and Arboun  (Earnest  Money)

The  basis for the  permissibility  of guarantees  in  tenders  and  earnest money  is the  afore-mentioned  authority  for guarantees  in general.  Both guarantees  in  tenders  and security  deposits  are permissible  because  they facilitate obtaining  compensation   for actual damages  in  case of breach  of contract.  The basis for obtaining  the earnest money to secure performance

(1I7)  [AI-Tawbah (Repentance):  91]. (18)  Resolution No. 30 (5/4)



144





Shan'ah  Standard  No. (5):  Guarant ees

is  the practice  ofUmar Ibn Al-Khattab  (may Allah be pleased  with  him) in the presence  of some companions  of the Prophet  (peace be upon  him), which has been permitted  by Imam  Ahmad.  A resolution  has been issued in connection  with the permissibility  of  'Arboun  (Earnest  Money) by the
International  Islamic Fiqh Academy.

Priority  right  of recovery  and the right  to follow up

The basis for the permissibility  of the priority  of certain  rights,  such as those of liquidators, is that these rights are considerations that are determined by the judiciary  on  the basis of public interest.  The basis  for giving priority to  a person  whose  assets  per  se   have contributed   to  the  increase  of the bankrupt's assets,  and have been located  and identified,  is the Hadith ct the Prophet (peace be upon him):  "If one sells a commodity,   and the owner thereof becomes  bankrupt,  and  then  he finds  it  without being  altered,  he  has more right  over it than the other  creditors."9  A resolution  in connection  with the permissibility  of pref zrence  was issued  by the Second  Fiqh Seminar  hosted by Kuwait Finance House, based on a number  of Fiqh  rulings determining certain  preferences that include priority  in the recovery of debts.  The right of following up the subject  of a mortgage is based on the fact that the aim of the mortgage  is  to facilitate recovery of the amount  of the debt and leaving the debtor without a right of follow-up will defeat this  objective.


















(19)   Resolution  No.  72  (3/8)  in respect of 'Arboun (Earnest  Money).
(20)  Related  by  A!Bukhari  and  Muslim  with diffe rent  texts  as follows:  1If one finds  his
property without  being altered  in  the possession of a bankrupt,  he has more right over it
than  the other creditors':  "Sahih Al- Bukhari" (H: 2402);  and Sahih Muslim"  (H: 1559).



145





Shari'ah  Standar d No,  (5)  Guaran tees





Appendix (C)
Definitions


Payables:
Debts that are absolutely payable  and liabilities held on trust basis,  either because of being contractually created, or because unjust  enrichment has given  rise to a liability for restitution.
Liabilities:

Liabilities held  on  trust  basis,  i.e.,  obligations  that  are  not  subject  to compensation  for any loss suffered except in circumstances of misconduct, negligence or violation  of the conditions  agreed upon.

































146






















Shariah  Standard No.  (6)



Conversion of a Conventional
Bank to an Islamic Bank












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page

Pref: ilce...................................................................................................        151
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................         152

1.   Scope  of the Standard..............................................................................         152
2.  Time Frame for  the Conversion ........so.sos.so.sos.so.cos.sos..coo..o.a...         152
3,  Necessary Measures for Conversion  .........sos.sos.so.sos.sos.coos.so.o.....         153
4.  Dealings with Banks.................................................................................         154
5.  Providing  Bankin g Services in Permissible  Ways ..............a....a..    155
6.  Effect   of  Conversion  on  the  Interest  Based Receivables  and  Their
Shari'ah  Alternatives.................................................................................         155

7.  Effect  of Conversion  on Investments..........s.as..as.so..s...a..............         156
8.  Treatment   of  the  Bank's   Non-Permissible    Existing   Receivables
before the Decision to Convert...............................................................         157
9.  Treatment   of  Non-Permissible   Liabilities  before  the  Decision  to
Convert,  Whether  the Conversion  ls  Internal  er External..................         158

10.  Disposal of Impermissible  Earnings  .............................................         159

I 1.  Zakah  Obligation  on the Bank  before the  Decision to Convert.....         160
12.  Date d Issuance  of the Standard...........................................................         160

Adoption  of  the Standard......................................................................         161

Appendices
Appendix (a):   Brief History cf the Preparation  of the Standard.............          162
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard.....................................         164













149








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE  ALL-MERCIFUL,  THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all his companions





Preface


The  aim  of this  standard  is to  explain  procedures,  mechanisms and treatments  that  are  required    for   converting  a  conventional  bank   to an Islamic  bank  (bank/banks)"that observes  the  rules and  principles of Shari'ah in its operations and financial relationships, and, at the same time, embraces  the  objectives  and  functions of Islamic  banking   services.  The standard  also includes  an outline  of significant Islamic banking  activities that  constitute alternatives  to conventional banking  practices  that  are in place prior  to conversion.

























(I) The word (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer,  in short, to Islamic  financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



151





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard  covers fundamental  mechanisms  for converting  a conven• tional bank to a bank that complies with Shari'ah  rules and principles  right after the decision to undertake immediate comprehensive conversion within a particular designated period that is  announced, whether  such a decision comes  from within  the bank or from outside  the bank to be converted by outside  parties  interested  in converting it.  The standard  covers the time frame required for the conversion, the effect of conversion on the methods used to solicit  and receive  deposits,  and the method  to be used to invest such deposits. The standard  provides guidance on how to treat the receiv• ables and liabilities  realized by the bank prior to the conversion,  whether or not such receivables and liabilities are received or paid.  The standard includes a treatment  of the prohibited  assets that are in the possession of the bank before conversion and the appropriate ways of disposing of them.

The standard  does  not  cover activities  of the  converting  bank  that  are naturally  permissible  or the  profit made  by permissible  means,  as these are not the subject  matter  of the conversion.  This is  because  there  is  no Shari'ah  objection  to the  bank  continuing such  activities or employing them  for its  own benefit.  The standard   also does not  cover activities  cf
Islamic windows  or departments  or units in conventional  banks.

2. Time  Frame for  the Conversion

2/ 1    I is  necessary   that  all Shari'ah  requirements  be  executed   in  the process  of converting  a conventional  bank  to  a potential   Islamic bank.  It is  also necessary  that  the Shari'ah  rules  and  principles   be observed   in  respect  of all  new  transactions  after  conversion.  In principle,  the  transactions  that  are  concluded   before  the  decision to  convert  must  be ceased  or  disposed   of immediately.  It is  not permissible    to  delay   clearing   out   non-permissible  transactions



152





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank

unless such delay becomes a necessity   or a pressing need. Thus, the circumstances surrounding  the conversion must be taken into consideration  in order to avoid the risk of failure or a breakdown of the bank's operations, taking into account that the provisions of. this standard will be applied to accommodate the situation.

2/2 If the  bank did not decide on an immediate  and comprehensive conversion as per item 2/1  and decided to adopt a gradual  or partial conversion,  then it  is  not regarded as  a converted bank and may not be  granted a licence as an Islamic bank unless the conversion process  is  completed.  The shareholders are required to accelerate the process of: conversion  in order to free themselves from the sin of impermissible  activities.  This standard may be  used as a guideline for identifying the steps of: conversion.

2/3  The impermissible  profits realised and transactions  concluded during the period of conversion  can be treated  as per the explanation in items
8-11.

3.  Necessary Measures for Conversion

3/1   For  the success   of: the process  of conversion,  it  is  necessary that the bank set up all necessary  procedures, create the required tools, explore alternatives  to  non-permissible  financial practices,  and train  and promote  the personnel  required  for proper implementation of:  the procedures of conversion.

3/2  The  appropriate  administrative arrangements must  be in  place,  in• cluding changing the bank's operating license if required by the  super• visory authorities,  and amending the bank's  by-laws  (memorandum and articles of association) through the required procedures so  that they include objectives and operational measures that are appropriate to Islamic banking.  The by-laws must be cleansed from anything that contradicts the nature oflslamic banking.

3/3  Restructuring the organizational structure  of the bank and its em• ployment procedures, conditions  and employee statutes to fit the situation  of conversion.



153





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank

3/4  Formation  of a Shari'ah  supervisory  board  and an internal  Shari'ah compliance department in accordance with the Governance Standards issued by Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial Institutions.

3/5  Reformatting or designing standard contracts or specimens or exem•
plars of documents  that comply with Shari'ah  rules and principles.

3/6 Opening accounts with local or international  Islamic banks and revamping  of the accounts that are maintained  with local  or corre• sponding  conventional  banks  [see,  item  4 (b)].  Any dealings  with conventional banks must be limited  to the magnitude  of the need to do  so.

3/7  Preparing a special programme  fa- preparing personnel and training them to deal with  the application of Islamic banking practices.

3/8 Taking necessary  measures for the implementation of accounting, auditing, governance,  and  ethics  standards  issued by Accounting and Auditing  Organization  for Islamic Financial  Institutions.

4.  Dealings with Banks

4/1   Exerting all possible efforts to adapt the ways of dealing with central banks regarding  deposits, liquidity  needs or otherwise  in a way that does  not  conflict  with  the  rules  of  Shari'ah,  especially  rules  that govern  Riba transactions.  The  possible  alternatives  to  the  reserve amount required by law include, among others, depositing receivables represented by commercial paper to be paid later by customers instead of   accepting  the  freezing  of   the  cash account.  The  bank  can  also finance  government   projects  using  Islamic  instruments.   Among the possible alternatives for the purpose  of  set-off is  for the bank to maintain  current  accounts  that  accrue  no interest  or disposing  of the  interest  earned,  if that  is  impossible,  and adapting  the ways of dealing with the central bank for acquiring liquidity, for example,  by the opening of investment  accounts for the central bank.

4/2 Revamping the transactions  with conventional  banks on the basis of Riba free transactions  and the application of instruments  acceptable by Sharf'ah.



154





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to  an Islamic Bank

4/3  Intensifying  transactions  with Islamic  financial  Institutions   through bilateral exchange of current  or investment  accounts and considerable cooperation  in  the areas  of remittances,   documentary  credits and syndicated  financing.

5. Providing Banking Services  in Permissible  Ways

In providing  banking  services, it is  not permissible for the bank to receive interest  as compensation  for  services  rendered.  It is  a requirement that an Islamic  alternative   be worked  out,  such  as treatment of uncovered documentary credits through Murabahah,  Musharakah or Mudarabah in  accordance   with  the  rules  of Shari'ah.  It  is  not  permissible   to  take a commission  for providing   a mere  facility. However,  the  commission may be linked to expenses  incurred  for the execution  of the credit facility accordingly.

6. Effect of Conversion  on  the  Interest  Based  Receivables  and  Their
Shariah Alternatives

6/1  All traces  of conventional  transactions whereby the bank originated monetary assets and is liable to pay interest for them must be liquidated. This is the rule whether such transactions involve individuals, banks or central banks. This  liquidation  includes,  among others,  the conditions relating to the  deposits,  preference  shares,  investment bonds  and interest-based   certificates  that  were  issued  by  the bank before  the decision for conversion.  [see item  9]

6/2  The bank must confine  itself to permissible operations for acquiring the necessary  funds to operate  or to meet  its liabilities. Examples  ct such operations are:

6/2/1  The shareholders may increase  their  share  capital  in order  to increase  the bank's  capital  and  provide  a basis for attracting investment accounts and current accounts.

6/2/2  Issuance oflslamic certificates such as Mudarabah, Musharakah or Ijarah certificates within  the parameters  of Shari'ah.

6/2/3 Concluding  Salam  contracts  whereby   the bank acts  in  the capacity  of a supplier,  or Istisna'a contracts whereby  the bank



155





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank

acts  in  the  capacity  of a manufacturer  or  builder  with  the condition  that the contract price of the Istisna'a is paid to the bank in advance,  although  the deferment of payment  of the
price in Istisna'a is allowed by Shari'ah.

6/2/4  Concluding  a sale-and  leaseback  deal by selling some  of the assets  of the  bank for  liquidity  and  leasing  them   back  by means  of an ljarah  contract. This  transaction   must  take into account the Shari'ah  Standards on ljarah and Ijarah  Muntahia
Bittamleek whereby the contract  of sale must be independent from the contract  of lease, i.e. the two contracts must  remain separate from each other.

6/2/5 Concluding  Tawarruq deals in line with Shari'ah principles  by buying a commodity  on a deferred  payment  basis and selling it to a third party, other than the previous seller, for immediate payment.
6/3  If the  capital  ct the  bank  has  increased   due  to  non-permissible transactions  or the accumulation of reserves based on non-permissible transactions,  then  its  treatment   must  be  in  accordance   with  the treatment  of non-permissible receivables or other  non-permissible assets in the possession  of the bank  as discussed  below.  [see items 8 and  10]

7.  Effect of Conversion  on Investments

7/1   AII interest-based  investment   instruments must  cease to be  used and must be replaced  by permissible  investment  instruments such as Mudarabah, all Shari'ah-nominate partnerships, diminishing Musharakah,  sharecropping  partnerships  (agricultural,  planting or  irrigation  partnership)  or  financing by way of deferred  sales, Murabahah,   Salam,   Istisna'a,  operating  Iljarah,   ljarah   Muntahia
Bittamleek  or other  permissible financing  and  investment   instru•
ments.

7/2  All possible efforts must be exerted to terminate all interest-based loans that the bank has made before the decision to convert,  whether  such loans  are medium-term  or long-term  facilities,  followed by converting



156





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank

the principal  amounts  to  financing  instruments  in accordance  with the rules and principles af Shari'ah.  If the bank is unable  to terminate some of these loans,  then the bank must dispose of the interest earned in the manner  explained in item  10/2.

8. Treatment of the Bank's Non-Permissible Existing Receivables before the Decision  to Convert

8/1   Non-permissible assets of the bank originated  or acquired  before the decision to convert
Starting  from  the  financial   period   in which  the  bank decides  to
convert,  the following must be done:

8/1/1  If a conventional  bank is  acquired with the intention  to convert it to an Islamic bank, the new owners are not obliged ID  dispose of interest  and  impermissible  earnings  that  have been  earned before such acquisition.
8/1/2  If a conventional bank is  converted  by its existing shareholders into an Islamic bank, then the process of disposing of interest and impermissible  earnings  should  be considered  as commencing at the beginning  of the financial period in which the conversion starts  to take effect. However,  for any impermissible  earnings that  have been distributed  prior  to conversion,  it  is  necessary, on  ethical  grounds,   for  the  shareholders   and  depositors  to
whom  these earnings  have been distributed  to dispose of them personally.  The bank is  not bound  to do so.

8/1/3  Revenues  not  yet received that  are  of  doubtful  permissibility are  not  subject  to  compulsory  disposal,  whether   they  were earned before or during  the financial period  in which the bank decides to convert. The same rule applies to revenues of doubtful permissibility  that have been already received because of a belief that they are permissible  on the basis of  (I) an interpretation  of a person  who is  qualified to perform  Ijtihad on issues that  are subject  to personal  juristic  interpretation,  (II)  juristic  position of an  authoritative   school  of Shari'ah  or  (III)  the  opinion  of
some eminent  and knowledgeable  scholars.



157





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank

8/1/4  If the  bank has  rights  to prohibited non-monetary  assets,  it may receive them with the intent to destroy them. If the bank is entitled to receive consideration for supplying non-permissible assets or services, the bank may receive the consideration  with the intent to donate  it to charity. The same rule applies to any income  that  has  been  acquired  from  non-permissible  assets
during  the  period   in which  the  bank decides  to  convert.  In
both cases, the customer  should  not be allowed to avoid paying the  amount   receivable  or  the  consideration,  otherwise   such a customer would end up being entitled  to two counter-va1ues of the same transaction:  the good or service supplied  and the price payable for it.
8/1/5  If the bank is  converted and  it has,  among  its  tangible  assets, impermissible  commodities,  the  bank is   obliged  to  destroy them.  If the bank  has sold some of these  commodities and is yet to receive the price thereof, the price must be received and be donated to charity.

8/1/6 If the property  assets of the bank  are locations designated  for non-permissible activities, they should be changed to locations designated  for permissible operations  and services.

9.  Treatment  of Non-Permissible Liabilities before  the Decision  to Con•
vert, Whether the Conversion Is Internal  or External

9/1  Internal conversion

9/1/1  If the liabilities are in the form of payment  of interest, the bank should  employ all lawful means  to avoid paying such interest. This rule does not apply to the principal  amounts  of debts or loans.  The bank should  not pay interest except on the basis of dire need.
9/1/2  If the liabilities are in the form of obligations  to provide  non• permissible services, then the bank is obliged to make every effort to  terminate  such  liabilities,  by refunding  the  consideration, even if it  has to pay compensation  for non-fulfilment   of such obligations.



158





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank

9/2  External conversion through acquisition  of the  bank by parties
interested in converting  it.

If the purchaser  is  capable of negotiating  a deal  that could exclude all non-permissible receivables (e.g. interest and non-permissible assets) from  the  acquisition   deal  in a way that  will make  the seller  solely liable for  non-permissible liabilities,  then  the Shari'ah  requires  that the purchaser  do so.  However,  if the acquisition  cannot  be concluded
unless all assets ct the bank including  the non-permissible assets and
receivables are acquired,  then the purchaser is  required  by Shari'ah to act as quickly as possible to dispose of non-permissible liabilities even if the purchaser  has to suggest to the creditors  of the bank an earlier repayment  for a discount.

9/3  Treatments for impermissible  mortgages

The shareholders  must accelerate the redemption  ct all impermissible mortgages  attached  to the assets ct the bank. In the case ct external conversion, the buyer must stipulate that the seller replaces impermis• sible mortgages with permissible ones.

10.  Disposal of Impermissible Earnings

10/1    All impermissible   earnings  acquired  by the bank before  conver• sion that need to be disposed  ct as per the rules  in this  standard must  without  delay be paid to charity,  unless it is  difficult  to do so, for example, where complete disposal promptly will lead to the collapse of the bank er bankruptcy.  In this  case,  the implementa• tion of conversion  can reasonably take place gradually.

10/2    Any interest and other non-permissible earnings  should be chan• nelled to charity  and general  public  utilities.  It is  not permissible for the bank to use this money, directly or indirectly, for its own benefit.  Examples of charitable  channels  include,  among  others, training  people other than the staff of the bank, funding  research, providing   relief  equipment,   financial   and  technical   assistance
for Islamic  countries  or Islamic scientific,  academic  Institutions, schools,  anything  to do with spreading  Islamic  knowledge,  and



159





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to  an Islamic Bank

similar channels.  The charity  money must go  to these channels in accordance with the resolutions  of the  Shari'ah  Supervisory Board of the bank.

11. Zakah  Obligation on the Bank before  the Decision  to Convert

When   the conversion   is   initiated  by   outsiders   who  acquired   the conventional   bank  for  the purpose   of converting   it,  then  they  are not  obliged  to  make  Zakah  payment  for  the  past  financial  periods because the Zakah  for previous periods  is  the liability of the previous owners.  The Zakah liability  will start  to exist for the new owners from the  date  of the decision  to  convert.   For  the  purpose  of  discharging
the  responsibility  to  pay Zakah,  the  owners  may  apply  the  Shari'ah
Standard  No.  (35)  on Zak.ah.  However,  if the decision  to convert  was made by the shareholders  and the Zak.ah was not paid  for the previous fi nancial periods, the shareholders are obliged to pay Zakah  for these periods.  They must take into account that they are obliged to pay Zakah even if the revenues and the money earned  are impermissible  because the shareholders  are obliged in the first place to dispose of all accrued interest and  impermissible  earnings.  So,  the payment  of Zakah is  part of the obligation to dispose of impermissible  earnings and interest.

12.  Date of Issuance  of the Standard

This Standard  was issued on 4 Rabi' I,  1424  A.H,  corresponding to 16
May 2002 A.D.




















160





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah  Standard  on Conversion  of a Conventional to an Islamic bank was adopted by the Shari'ah Board in its meeting No  (8)  held in Al• Madinah Al-Munawwarah on 28 Safar-4 Rab~' I,  1423 A.H.,, corresponding to 11-16 May 2002 A.D.











































161





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its  meeting No.  (5)  held in Makkah Al-Mukarrarnah  on 8-12  Ramadan
1421  A.H., corresponding to 4-8 December  2000 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board decided  to  give  priority   to  the  preparation   of a  Sharf'ah  Standard   on Conversion  of a Conventional  bank to an Islamic Bank.

On Monday  29 Ramadan   1421   A.H.,  corresponding to  25 December
2000 A.D.,  a Shari'ah  consultant  was  commissioned to  prepare  a juristic study and an exposure  draft.

In its  meeting held in Bahrain on  15-16  Safar  1422  A.H.,  corresponding to 9-10 May 200 l A.D., the Shari'ah Studies  Committee  discussed the juristic study  and  made  certain  amendments  to  it.  The committee  also discussed the exposure  draft of the Standard  in its  meeting No.  (IO)  held  in Bahrain on 14 Rabi' I,  1422 A.H., corresponding  to 6 June 2001  A.D., and asked the consultant to make some amendments  in light cf the comments  made by the members.

In its meeting No. (1) held in Jordan on 17 Jumada II, 1422 A.H., corresponding  to  5  September  2001   A.D,  the Shari'ah  Studies  Committee
discussed the exposure draft am made some relevant amendments.

The  revised   exposure  draft   of the   standard   was  presented   to  the
Shari'ah  Board in its meeting  No.  (7)  held  in Makkah  Al-Mukarramah on
9-13  Ramadan   1422  A.H.,  corresponding to 24-28 November  2001  A.D. The  Shari'ah  Board  made  further  amendments  to  the  exposure  draft of the standard   and  decided  that  it  should  be distributed to specialists  and interested  parties  in order  to obtain  their  comments and  discuss  them  in
a public hearing.



162





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank

A public  hearing  was held  in  Bahrain  on  29  -20  Dhul-Hajjah   1422
A.H., corresponding to 2-3 February  2002 A.D..  The public  hearing was attended  by more  than  30  participants  representing central  Institutions, Institutions,  accounting   firms,  Shari'ah  scholars,  academics  and  others who  are interested  in this  field. The  members  responded  to the  written
comments  that were sent prior  to the public hearing as  well as to the oral
comments  that were expressed in the public hearing.

The Shari'ah Standards  Committee  in its meeting  held on 21-22 Dhul• Hajjah 1422  A.H.,  corresponding to 6-7 March 2002 A.D.,  in the Kingdom of Bahrain  discussed  the comments  made  about  the  exposure  draft.  The Committee  made the necessary  amendments,  which  it deemed  necessary in light of both  the discussions  that took place in the public hearing,  and the written  comments  that were received.

The  Shari'ah  Board  in its  meeting  No.  (8)  held  on  28 Safar  - 4 Rabi' I,  1423 A.H,,  corresponding to  11-16  May 2002 A.D,  in Al-Madinah  Al• Munawwarah  discussed the  amendments made  by the Shari'ah  Standards Committee, and made the necessary amendments,  which it deemed necessary. Some  paragraphs  of the  standard   were  adopted  by  the  unanimous  vote of the  members  of the  Shari'ah  Board,  while the  other  paragraphs   were adopted  by the majority  vote of the members,  as recorded  in the minutes of the Shari'ah Board.























163





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Gradual  Clearance  of Non-Permissible  Previous Transactions
The basis for the permissibility  of gradual clearance of non-permissible previous transactions  due to necessity or need and in accordance  with the rules  ofShari'ah is  because it is not feasible  for the converting  bank to clear all  non-permissible   transactions   immediately.  Therefore,  the  bank must dispose of the effects ofi impermissible  transactions  because this  is  feasible.

Necessary  Procedures  and  Mechanisms for Conversion
Since the realisation of the conversion  is dependent on the procedures and mechanisms mentioned in this standard, these procedures and mechanisms thus become permissible or in certain circumstances their use becomes obligatory when the conversion will not be realised without applying these procedures  and mechanisms.  This is because conversion is  obligatory,  and if
an obligation can be realised only by means of a particular way or tool,  then the use of such a tool also becomes an obligation.

Providing Banking Services

The basis for the permissibility of providing banking services that are  not related to giving  loans  on an interest-bearing  basis is  that such  an operation is a practical application  of ljarah and an agency contract with remuneration. If providing these services involves Riba then the operation becomes impermissible as it is  a Riba-based transaction  that is  prohibited by Shari'ah.
Attracting Investments
The conversion necessitates doing away with the conventional methods of attracting investment funds such as interest-bearing  deposits,  which should be replaced by the application of Mudarabah  and Musharakah contracts  or acting as  an investment  agent. The basis for the  impermissibility  of  using conventional   methods   of attracting   investments   is  the  Saying  of Allah,



164





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic  Bank

the  Exalted:  {"But  Allah  has permitted  trade  and forbidden  usury"}. The  basis for  terminating   all previous   impermissible  transactions   is  the Saying  of Allah,  the Exalted:  {"Give  up what  remains  of your demand for
usury"}.  Also,  a number  of Shari'ah  boards  have issued resolutions  for the
treatment  of pre-conversion  liabilities  that  involve  payment  of interest  by using Shari'ah acceptable instruments and the conversion of interest-based bonds  to  Islamic certificates  and  shares."  The  Fiqh  Academy under  the auspices  of the Muslim World League has issued a resolution confirming the permissibility ofTawarruq (which  is  one of the instruments  that can be used to acquire liquidity).6

Investment of Funds
The basis for the rule that the bank must cease investing through making loans and receiving interest  is  that this is  Riba and paying or receiving Riba is  prohibited.
■   The basis for the alternatives to interest-based  transactions  provided in this standard  is the authorities  that are mentioned  for each investment instrument in details in the Figh books"and  the Shari'ah  Standards.
Treatment of Impermissible Rights of  the Bank  before  the Decision  to
Convert
• The basis for  not  obliging  the  bank  to  dispose  of impermissible   in• tangible assets from the previous  financial period,  i.e.  before  the year of conversion, is because the management  of the bank cannot  change rights originating  in the previous fi nancial  period,  as the responsibili• ty and authority  for doing  so ends at the end of the previous  fi nancial period.  As for the shareholders  (the  owners),  they are obliged person-

(2)  [AI-Baqarah  (The Cow):  275]. (3)  [AI-Baqarah  (The Cow):  278].
(4)  "Qararat  A!Hay 'ah  AI-Shar'iyyah  Li Sharikat   Al Rahr:  Fatwa  No.  (106  and 200);
Fatawa  Nadwat Al  Baraka"  [IH:  6];  "Fatwa  Hay 'at Al-Fatwa  Wa Al-Raqabah  Al•
Shar'iyyah Ii Bayt Al-Tamwil AI-Kuwaytr" No. (415).
(5)  "Qararat Majma' AL-Fiah Al-Islami AL-Tabf' Li Rabitat Al-'Alam Al-Islami", the session
held in 1419  A.H.
(6)  See: Chapters on Mudarabah, partnerships, agency contract, sales, ljarah, etc. in different
Fiah boaks and also the Sharf'ah  rules for investment  and financing  instrument issued
by Accounting  and Auditing  Organisation  for  Islamic Financial  Institutions.



165





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank

ally to dispose  of any dividends  from  non-permissible  earnings  that were distributed  to them,  because  the  responsibility  of shareholders remains  even after  termination  of the responsibility  of the  manage• ment at the end of the financial  period,  ie.  the end of financial  period does exonerate  shareholders  from responsibility.
• The basis for allowing the bank to keep impermissible earnings and in• come of doubtful permissibility earned on the basis  of an interpretation of a person who is  qualified to perform Ijtihad on issues  that are subject to personal juristic interpretation and the juristic position of an authorita• tive School of~Shari'ah, etc.,, is that the Shari'ah validates actions that occur on the basis  of an interpretation  that one believes to be valid until such an interpretation  is  proved incorrect. The scholars are unanimous  that in times of social unrest due to the actions of insurgents  who believe in their cause by interpretation  or ljtihad to the effect  that they have a right to do so,  the insurgents  are entitled  to items of property  they acquire during this time,  even  if they realise later  that they were wrong and end
their act of insurgence."
The  basis   for destroying  the  bank's non-permissible   tangible  assets in the possession  of others before the year of conversion  is  that these assets are worthless  by Shari'ah  Standards  since they are impermissible. This  is  because disposing  of a prohibited  thing is  an obligation  as in the  case when  the  verse that  prohibited  liquor  was revealed  people discharged  the wine that was in their  possession.
Treatment  of Non-Permissible Liabilities  of the Bank before the Decision
to Convert
■   The basis for the rule that the bank  should  refrain from paying inter• est  after the conversion  is  because such interest is  not,  by the Shari'ah Standard,  a valid  debt  that  should  be honoured.  Again,  repentance through conversion necessitates refraining from prohibited acts in• cluding payment  of interest.  The principle  of necessity is  the basis  for allowing payment  of interest if the bank could not ref rain  from doing


(7) See Ibn  Qudamah,  A1Maughn" [12: 250-251],  Hajr publication, 2 edition 1413  A.H., edited  by Abdullah  Al Turki and Abdul-Fattah  Al-Hulw.



166





Shari'ah  Standard No.  (6):  Conversion of a Conventional Bank to an Islamic Bank

so because of lack of legal protection and the possibility that the bank may be subject to punishment that may prevent the avoidance of pay• ing interest. The payment of interest due to necessity is  supported by saying of Allah,  the Exalted:  {"Whoever disbelieved in Allah after his belief, except him who is forced thereto and whose heart is at rest with Faith.."" and the saying of the Prophet (peace be upon him):  "Verily, Allah,  the Exalted, Has forgiven  my ummah those act done by mistake, forgetfulness and compulsion"."
The basis for  making a distinction between the principal loan  and in• terest is  because the loan contracts per se  are valid.  It is  the  interest associated with the loan that is  forbidden. This  is the view of the Hanafi jurists who say that the loan contract itself is valid  and the condition  to pay interest is void.   Again, the basis for this ruling is  the legal maxim that says acts of Muslims must be deemed valid as far as possible even if their acts are based on a non-preferable juristic view.(
■  The  basis  for the  requirement  that  the outside  buyer interested  in converting the conventional bank should  exert all possible  effort  to exclude impermissible  rights  is  that  the payment  of interest  is   the responsibility of the seller.  Such  interest  would  have no bearing on the buyer of the bank as  the seller's  right  to receive  such interest  can be taken into account in computing  the price to be paid for the bank. If the buyer is  unable to convince the seller in this  respect,  the principle of necessity becomes applicable  with  regard to  payment of interest. The basis for extinguishing Riba-based loans  as soon  as possible even if such  an act will impose   on the buyer the  need to suggest to  the creditor/s early payment of these loans for a discount is the principle of Da' Wa Ta'ijjal(discount for acceleration of payment) that was endorsed by the resolution of International Islamic Fiqh Academy provided the discount was not agreed upon earlier

(8)  [AI-Nahl  (The  Bees):  106].
(9)  The Hadith is related by  bn Majah, "Sunan Ibn Majah" [I:  695]. (10)  See Al- Sarakhsi,  Al-Mabst [12:  25-26],  Dar AI-Ma'rifih.
(11)  See lbn AI-Humam,  "Fath Al- Qadir" [9:  114],  Dar Al-Fikr;  AlSarakhsi,  Al-Mabsut"
[7:  86];  AI-Kasani,  "Bada 'r' AI-Sana'i",  [3:  79],  [4:  5],   [7:  149  and 177],  (Dar A•
Kutub AI-'Ilmiyyah).
(12)  International Islamic  Fiqh Academy  Resolution No. 64 (2/7).



167





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion  of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank

The basis for  requiring  that the purchaser accelerate the redemption  of all impermissible  mortgages attached to the assets of the bank is because Riba is  prohibited;  hence,  securing  payment  of Riba by personal  guar•
antees or mortgages  is  also prohibited.  It must be noted  that the grave•
ness of securing  Riba by personal  guarantee  is  greater than  graveness of securing  Riba by writing  and attestation, which were mentioned  in the saying of the Prophet  (peace be  upon  him):  "Allah  curses  the  one  who take (earn)  Riba,  the  one  who gives  it,  the  one  who  scribe  it and  the two witnesses" 0
Treatment of Impermissible Tangible Assets Acquired by the Bank Before
the Decision  to Convert
• The  basis for destroying the existing tangible  assets  of the bank  after conversion  has already been explained. The basis for donating to char• ity receivables  earned  from  trading  in such  assets  has also  been  ex• plained  earlier.  The basis for transforming the locations that were used for impermissible  services to locations  for  permissible services  is  that the prohibition does not concern  tbe location itself rather  the prohibi• tion relates to the use of tbe location.
Disposal of Impermissible Rights
■  The basis  for the requirement that impermissible earnings  be donated to charity is that these revenues are not permissible  for the person  who earns  them.  This  is  evidenced  by the  order  of the  Prophet  (peace be upon  him) that the usurped goat be given to war prisoners.9
The basis  for  indicating  cbarity  as  a way of disposing  of impermissi•
ble  earnings  is that by transferring the ownership  of these earnings,  the characterisation  of probibition  in respect  to these  earnings  is  cbanged and they become  permissible  for  the beneficiary. Again,  a thing which is  probibited  for one person  is  not  necessarily  prohibited  for another person, ie. when it is  prohibited for one,  it may be permissible  for other.

(13)  The Hadith   has  been related  by   Muslim in  his   "Sahih"  [3:   1219],  verified  by
Muhammad Fu'ad Abdul-Baqi, Dar  Ihya Al-Turath Al'Arabi.
(14)  The Hadith has been related by Al-Daraqutni,  "Sunan Al-Daraqutnt"  [4:  285];  and
"NaN AI-Awtar" [9:  18].



168





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (6):  Conversion of a Conventional  Bank to an Islamic Bank

The International  Islamic Fiqh Academy has issued  a resolution  in sup•
port of this ruling.!"
• The basis  for allowing delay in disposal of non-permissible  earnings  if such disposal will lead  a total breakdown of the activities  of the bank or its  bankruptcy  is  that the  Fuqaha were of the view that a repentant  may use impermissible earnings to cover his unavoidable needs. However, the
Institution  is  not entitled to benefit whatsoever, i.e. directly or indirectly, from the earnings  that must be disposed of. This is because such benefit adds value to the asset of the Institution.
The channels  for disposing of impermissible  earnings include, as well as those mentioned  in this standard, all other channels of  disposal that the Shari'ah  Supervisory Board of each Institution  will regard as appropriate channels for disposal of impermissible  earnings.
































(15)  International  Islamic  Fiqh Academy Resolution No.  13 (1/3).



169


























Shari'ah Standard No.  (7)



Hawalah












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        176
1,   Scope of the Standard ............so.sos«sos.so.sso.so.ss.sos.sos.so........       176
2.  Definition of Hawalah..............................................................................        176
3.  PermissibilityofHawalah ............o....o...o..oo.so.»..s.so.so.so..................       176
4.  Form of  a Hawalah  Contract  ......so . o oososoooosooooooooro so sooooo ooooo oo» .        176
5.  Types of Hawalah and the Applicable Rulings ............coo....    177
6.  Conditions of  Hawalah ..... .,.....,.................................................................        178
7.  Effect  af Hawalah on the Relationship between the Transferor and
the Transfi ~r ~e............................................................................................        178
8.  Effect  of Hawalah on the Relationship between the Transferor and
the Payer                                                                                                   179
9.  Effed  of Hawalah on the Relationship  between the Transferee and
t heyer........ .. .. .. .. ... .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. .. .. .. . .. ... .. .... .. ... . .. .. . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. ... ... ... .. . .. .. . ..            I 79
IO.  Etfoct of Death and Bankruptcy on a Hawalah Transaction...............        179
11.  Termination of a Hawalah Liability........................................................        180
12.  Modern Applications ofHawalah Rules................................................        180
13.  Date of Issuance of the Standard.............................................................        183
Adoption  of the Standard......................................................................        184
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard.............         185
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard.....................................        187
Appendix (c):   Definitions..............................................................................        193










173








IN  THE NAME OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all  the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all  his companions





Preface


The aim of this standard is  to explain the rulings,  types,  requirements and limitations  of transfors  (transfer cf debts and transfor of rights),  what is  permissible or prohibited in this regard, and the applications of transfers in Islamic fi nancdal Institutions  (Institution/Institutions).































(1) The  word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer,  in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



175





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (7)  Hawalah





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard  covers Hawalah transactions that involve a change of debtor, i.e.  transfer  of debt.  The scope  of this  standard  does  not  cover  banking remittances except the remittances that take the form ofHawalah  (transfer of debt).

2. Definition ofHawalah

Hawalah of debt is  the transfer of debt from the transferor  (Muheel) to the payer (Muhal Alaihi). 'The transf zr of right, on the other hand, is a replacement of a creditor with  another creditor.  The transfer of debt differ from transf zr of right  in that in transf zr  of debt a debtor  is  replaced by another  debtor, whereas in a transf r of right a creditor is  replaced by another creditor.
3.  Permissibility of Hawalah

3/1  Hawalah  is  a legitimate and  an independent contract made  out of courtesy and  is  not  a  contract of sale.  It is  permitted in order  to facilitate  payments and  recovery.

3/2  The acceptance  ofHawalah is  recommended for the transf zree if the potential  payer  is  known  to be solvent  and  a person  who honours payments.  This  is  because  Hawalah  benefits the  creditor and  gives relief to  the  debtor.  If the  financial  status  and  creditworthiness  of the  potential  payer  are unknown,  then  Hawalah  becomes  Mubah (permissible).

4. Form of a Hawalah Contract

4/1   A contract of Hawalah can be concluded by an offer from the transferor and acceptance from the transferee (Muhal) and the payer in a manner that clearly indicates the intention of the parties to conclude a Hawalah contract  and  the  transfer  of the  liability or obligation  in respect  of



176





Sharf 'ah  Stan dar d No.  (7)  Hawalh

a debt from one party to another party. It is not necessary that the word transfer be used.

4/2  Hawalah is a binding  contract.  Therefore, it is not subject to unilateral termination.

4/3  It is  a requirement that  a  transfer of debt  take  effoct immediately;, not  to be suspended for  a period  of time  and  not  to be concluded on a temporary basis or contingent on future  events. However, it is permissible to defer payment  of the transferred  debt until  a future specified  date.

5. Types ofHawalah  and the Applicable Rulings

5/1  Hawalah is divided into restricted  and unrestricted  Hawalah.

5/1/1  Restricted Hawalah is permissible.  It is a transaction  where the payer is restricted to settling the amount  of the transforred  debt from the amount  of  a financial  or tangible asset that belongs to the transferor and is in the possession  of the payer.

5/1/2  Unrestricted  Hawalah  is  permissible.  It is  a  kind  of transfer of debt in which  the transf ror  is  not  a creditor  to the  payer and the payer undertakes to pay the amount of the debt owed by,  the  transferor  from  his  own  funds  and  to  have recourse afterwards  to the transf ror for settlement, provided that  the transfer for payment  was made on the order  of the transf zror.

5/1/3  I is permitted  to conclude  a Hawalah on a spot payment  basis.
This  is  a Hawalah  in which  the debt  transf 2rred  to the payer becomes  payable  on  the  spot,  whether   the debt  has already fallen due and the obligation  is then transf 2rred to the payer for immediate  settlement, or the transferred  debt is yet to fall  due and  the  transferee  has required,  as  a  condition   for accepting the transfer,  that it be paid immediately by virtue of  transfer.

5/1/4 It is  permissible  to conclude  a Hawalah contract on a deferred payment  basis. This is  a Hawalah in which the debt transferred to the payer is  to be paid in  the future, whether  the payment  of the debt is not yet due and was transferred as such to the payer,



177





Shar f'ah  Stan dard No.  (7)  Hawalh

or the payment  of such debt is  due but the payer required  that it should  be transferred for future  payment  at an agreed  date. In the latter case, the payer cannot  be asked for payment  before the agreed date.

6. Conditions of Hawalah

6/1  The  permissibility  of Hawalah  requires  the  consent  of all parties, namely the transferor,  the transferee  and the payer.
6/2  The permissibility  of a Hawalah requires that the transferor  be a debt• or to the transferee. A transaction in which a non-debtor transfers an• other is an agency contract  for collection of the debt and not a transfer of debt.
6/3  It is  not  a condition in a Hawalah  that the payer be a debtor  to the transferor.  If the payer is not a debtor  to the transferor,  the Hawalah will be an unrestricted Hawalah.  [see item 5/1/2]

6/4  It is a condition that  all Hawalah  parties be legally competent to act independently.
6/5   It  is  a condition  in Hawalah  that  both  the transf rred  debt  and the
debt to be used for settlement  be known and transferable.

6/6  It is a condition for concluding  restricted Hawalah that the transferred debt or the transfrred portion of the debt be equal to the debt owed to the transf zree in terms of kind, type, quality and amount. However, the transferor may transfer a lesser amount  of  a debt owed to the transferee to be settled from a larger amount  owed by the transferor on condition that  the transferee  be entitled  only to the  equivalent  amount  of his debt.

7. Effect of Hawalah  on the Relationship between the Transferor and the
Transf 2ree

7/1   A valid Hawalah discharges the transferor  from both the debt liability and any claims in respect of it.  In other words, the transferee will have no right  of  recourse  against the transferor  for payment.  However,  if



178





Sh arf'ah  Stan dard No.  (7)  Hawalh

the acceptance  of the transfer  was based  on the condition  that  the payer must be solvent,  then the transferee will have a right of recourse if the payer is  not solvent.

7/2 'The  transferee   is  entitled  to  have  a right  of recourse  against  the transferor in situations  of (I)  death  of the payer in bankruptcy,  (II) liquidation of an  Institution  that is the payer in the case of bankruptcy before  payment  of the  debt,   (III)   the  payer  is  declared  bankrupt in  his lifetime,  or he denies  concluding  the  Hawalah  contract and has taken  a judicial  oath  to this  effect  and there  is  no evidence  to prove otherwise  and (IV) the Institution  that is  the payer is declared bankrupt  by a court order.

8. Effect of Hawalah  on the Relationship between  the Transf ror and the
Payer

After the conclusion  of a restricted  Hawalah, the transf zror is  no longer entitled  to reclaim from the payer an amount  transforred to the payer in respect of the debt to be settled,  because the right  to receive this amount has now passed to the transf zree.
9. Effect of Hawalah  on the Relationship between  the Transferee and the
Payer

9/1  The transferee  is entitled to claim the amount  of the debt assigned to him through  Hawalah from the payer in accordance  with conditions of Hawalah  contract.  The payer, on the other hand,  is  obliged to pay him and has no right to refuse payment.
9/2 The payer takes the place of the transferor in respect to all rights,  legal protections and obligations. The transf zree in restricted Hawalah takes the place ofi the transferor in respect to all rights, legal protections and obligations against the payer.

10.   Effect of Death  and Bankruptcy  on a Hawalah  Transaction

10/I   A Hawalah shall  not be annulled  by the death of the transferor  or liquidation  of a transferor  Institution. The transferee  is  the sole owner ofi the amount  of the debt payable by the payer and,  after



179





Shar f'ah  Stan dar d No.  (7)  Hawalh

a Hawalah  transaction,  such  a debt  cannot  be  included  in the assets of the transferor that are available to be distributed,  after death or liquidation,  among creditors  on a pro rata basis.

10/2   A Hawalah transaction  shall not be annulled  due to the death of the payer or the liquidation of the Institution  acting as payer. In these cases,  the transf zree  will have the right of recourse  against the estate of the payer for  recovery,  a personal  guarantor,  if any, or  pre-distribution  assets  of the  liquidation.   However,  if the payer dies in the state of bankruptcy,  then the transferee  shall be entitled to have recourse  to the transf eror.  [see  item  7/2]

10/3   A Hawalah  transaction   shall  not  be  annulled  due to  the  death of the  transferee  and the  heirs shall  replace the transferee.  The Hawalah will also not be void  in case of liquidation  of a transferee Institution   in  which  case the  liquidator  takes  the  place  of the Institution  for settlement.

11.  Termination of a Hawalah  Liability

A Hawalah liability will come to an end  by settlement  of the debt or by a mutual  agreement  to terminate  it  or by the debt being written-off  by the transferee.

12.  Modern  Applications  of Hawalah Rules

12/1  Withdrawals from  a current account

An  issuance  of a  cheque  against  a current  account  is  a form  of Hawalah if the beneficiary  is a creditor of the issuer  or the account holder  for the  amount  of the  cheque,  in which  case the  issuer, the  bank  and  the  beneficiary  are  the  transferor,  the  payer  and the  transferee  respectively.  If the  beneficiary  is not  a  creditor to the  issuer  of the  cheque,  then  this is  not  a Hawalah  transaction because there can be  no Hawalah transaction  without  an existing debt. In the absence of a debt, the transaction  becomes an agency contract  for  recovery of the amount  of the debt on behalf of the
transferor, which is  permissible  by Shari'ah.



180





Sh arf'ah  Stan dard No.  (7)  Hawalh

12/2   Overdrawing  from an account or overdraft

If the beneficiary  of the amount  of a cheque  is  a creditor  to the issuer,  then  issuing  a cheque  against  the  account  of the  issuer without   a balance  is  unrestricted  transfer  of debt  if the  bank accepts the overdraft.  If the bank rejects the overdraft,  then  this is not  considered a transfer  of debt,  in which  case the potential beneficiary  may have recourse  to the issuer.

12/3   Travellers cheques

The holder of a travellers' cheque, the value of which has been paid by him to the issuing Institution, is a creditor to such an Institution. Ifthe holder ct the travellers' cheque endorses the cheque in favour of his creditor,  it becomes  a transfer of debt  in favour  of a third party  against the issuing  Institution  that  is  a debtor to the holder of the traveller's  cheque.  This  is  a restricted  transfer  of debt and the amount  of the debt  is  the value of  the  cheque  for  which  the Institution  received payment.

12/4   Bills of  exchange

12/4/1  A bill of exchange is a form of Hawalah  if the beneficiary is
a creditor  to the  drawer.  The  drawer  is,  in  this  case, the transf ror  who  gives orders  for  the  paying  bank  to pay a certain  sum of money  at a specified  date to the defi ned
beneficiary.  The party executing payment  cl such amount
of money  is  the  payer  whereas   the  beneficiary,  i.e.  the holder  of the  bill,  is  the  transferee.  If the  beneficiary   is not  a creditor  of the  drawer,  then  the issuance  of the bill of exchange  becomes   an  agency  contract   to  recover  or collect the amount  of the bill of exchange  on behalf of the drawer.
12/4/2   In the absence  cl a debt  obligation  between   the drawer and  the paying  bank,  the issuance  of a bill cl exchange becomes  an unrestricted Hawalah.



181





Sharf 'ah  Stan dard No.  (7)  Hawalh

12/5  Endorsement of a negotiable instrument

12/5/1  An endorsement of a negotiable instrument in a manner that  transfers title to its value to the beneficiary is a form ofHawalah if the beneficiary is a creditor to the endorser. If the beneficiary is not a creditor to the endorser, the en• dorsement becomes one of agency  contract for collection of the amount of the  debt.

12/5/2   An endorsement of a bill of exchange on behalf of a client who  requires the Institution to transfer,  after  collection, the  amount  of the   instrument  into  his  account  is  not a Hawalah. This is  a contract of agency  that  is permissible with or without consideration.

12/5/3   Subject to item  12/5/1, it is permissible for the first beneficiary from a bill of exchange to endorse  it in favour of  any other party.  The second  beneficiary  may also endorse  such a bill of exchange  in favour of a third  party  and so on,  in which case the  revolving of  endorsements is  a form  of  successive Hawalah which is  not objectionable  in Shari'ah.
12/5/4   I is not permissible to discount bills of exchange  by trans• ferring the ownership of their value, before their  due date, to an Institution or others for a discounted immediate payment. This is  because  the transaction  in this manner is a form f Riba.
12/6  Transfer of money (remittances)

The request  of a customer for the  Institution to transfer a certain amount of money  in the same currency from his current account to a particular beneficiary is  a transfer of debt  if the  applicant is a debtor  to such  a beneficiary.   The  fee that  the  Institution gains from   this  transaction  is   consideration  for  the  delivery   of  the money  and it is not an additional amount gained  by the Institution over the  amount transferred.  However,  if a remittance is  to take place in a currency different  from that  presented by the applicant



182





Sharf 'ah  Stan dar d No.  (7)  Hawalh

for the transfer, then the transaction  consists of a combination  of currency  exchange and a transfer  of money  that  is  permissible. [see  item  2/11  of the Sharf'ah  Standard  on Trading in Currencies]

13.   Date of Issuance  ct the Standard

This standard  was issued  on Rabi' I,  1423  A.H.,  corresponding to 16 May
2002A.D.















































183





Sharf 'ah  Standard  No. (7):  Hawalah





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'.ah  Standard  on Hawalah was adopted  by the Shari'ah  Board  in its meeting No (8) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah on 28 Safar- 4 Rabil' I,  1423  A.H., corresponding to 11-16  May 2002 A.D.













































184





Sharf 'ah  Standard  No. (7)  Hawalah





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (5) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 8-12  Ramadan
1421  A.H.,  corresponding  to 4-8 December  2000 A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Board decided to give priority to the preparation of a Shari'ah Standard on Hawalah.

On 29 Ramadan  1421  A.H., corresponding to 25 December  2000 A.D., a Shari'ah  consultant  was commissioned  to  prepare  a juristic study  and an exposure  draft.
In its  meeting  held in Bahrain on 15-16  Safar  1422  A.H.,  corresponding to  9-10  May  2001   A.D.,   the  Shari'ah  Studies  Committee   discussed  the juristic study and made certain amendments to it. The committee also discussed the exposure draft of the Standard  in its  meeting No.  (10)  held in Bahrain  on 14  Rabi' I,   1422  A.H.,  corresponding to 6 June  2001  A.D.,  and asked the consultant  to make some amendments in light of the comments made by the members.

In its meeting  No.  (11) held in Jordan on  17 Jumada II,  1422 A.H., cor• responding  to 5 September  2001  A.D., the Shari'ah  Studies Committee  dis• cussed the exposure  draft and made some relevant amendments.

The revised exposure draft cf the standard  was presented  to the Shari'ah
Board  in  its meeting  No.  (7) held  in Makkah  Al-Mukarramah  on 9-13
Ramadan   1422  A.H., corresponding to 24-28 November  2001  A.D. The Shari'ah  Board  made  further amendments  to  the  exposure  draft of the standard  and  decided   that  it   should   be  distributed  to  specialists   and interested  parties  in order  to obtain  their  comments  in order  to discuss them in  a public hearing.
A public hearing was held in Bahrain  on 29-20 Dhul-Hajjah  1422 A.H., corresponding  to 2-3 February  2002.  The public hearing  was  attended  by



185





Sharf 'ah  Stan dar d No.  (7)  Hawalh

more than 30 participants representing central Institutions, Institutions, accounting firms,  Shari'ah  scholars,  academics and others  who are interested in this  field.  The members  responded  to  the written  comments  that were sent  prior  to the  public hearing  as well as to the  oral comments  that were expressed  in the  public hearing.

The Shari'ah Standards  Committee  in its meeting  held on 21-22 Dhul• Hajjah 1422  A.H., corresponding to 6-7 March  2002 A.D., in  the Kingdom of Bahrain  discussed  the  comments  made  about  the  exposure  draft.  The Committee  made  the necessary  amendments,  which  it deemed  necessary in light of both the discussions  that took place in the public hearing,  and the  written comments  that were received.
The Shari'ah  Board  in  its  meeting  No.  (8)  held  on  28 Safar  - 4 Rabi' I,   1423  A.H.,  corresponding to 11-16  May 2002  A.D,,  in Al-Madinah  Al• Munawwarah  discussed  the amendments made  by the Shari'ah  Standards Committee,   and   made   the   necessary   amendments,   which   it   deemed necessary. Some paragraphs  of the standard were adopted by the unanimous vote of the members  of the Sharf'ah  Board,  while the other paragraphs were adopted  by the majority  vote of the members,  as recorded  in the minutes of the Shari'ah  Board.

The Shari'ah Standards  Review Committee  reviewed the standard  in its meeting  held in Rab  II,  1433  A.H.,  corresponding to March  2012  A.D,, in the State  of Qatar,  and proposed  after deliberation  a set of amendments (additions,   deletions,  and  rephrasing)   as  deemed   necessary,  and  then submitted  the  proposed  amendments to the  Shari'ah  Board  for approval as it deemed  necessary.
In its  meeting  No.  (39)   held in the Kingdom  of Bahrain  on  13-15  Mu• harram  1435  A.H., corresponding to 6-8 November  2014  A.D., the Shari'ah Board  discussed   the  proposed   amendments  submitted   by  the Shari'ah Standards  Review Committee.  After deliberation,  the Shari'ah  Board  ap•
proved  necessary  amendments,  and  the standard  was adopted  in  its  cur•
rent  amended  version.







186





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (7)  Hawalah





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Permissibility  ofHawalah

The contract ofHawalah  derives its permissibility  from the Qur'an, the Sunnah,  Ijma'  (consensus  ofFuqaha)  and reasoning.  Abu Hurayrah  (may Allah be  pleased with him)  narrated that the Prophet (peace be upon him) said:  "Default on payment by a solvent debtor is unjust,   and ifanyone  of you
is  transferred  to  a solvent person,  he  must accept  the  transfer."  In another
text ct the Hadith,  related  by Ahmad  and AI-Bayhaqi,  the Prophet  (peace be upon  him)  said:   If one   is  referred  to  a solvent person for  the  recovery of his  right,  such  a person   must accept  the  transfer".   The Prophet's  order that  the creditor  must accept the transfer  means  transfer  of debt  is  legal, otherwise he would not give that order.

The permissibility  of Hawalah has enjoyed unanimity  in Muslim soci• eties and communities  from time immemorial and there is  no report  that anyone has disapproved  of it.63

The acceptance of a Hawalah contract is recommended  for the transferee if the  potential  payer is   known  to  be solvent  and  keeps his  promises   in respect to payments  because it  benefits the creditor and gives  relief to the debtor from  liability   by the transfer.
The basis that a Hawalah transaction  is  also Mubah (permissible)  for the transferee  if the financial status  and creditworthiness  af  the potential payer are unknown is that the order in the above-mentioned  Hadith does not make
it  a condition that the payer be solvent for the permissibility of Hawalah.  If

(2)  "Sahih Al-Bukhari"  [3:  123];  and "Sahih Muslim"  [3:  119].
(3)  Ibn   Qudamah,   4-Maughn"  [4:   336]; Al-Buhuti,   "Kashshaf Al-Qina"  [3:  382];  Al• Buhuti,  "Sharh Muntaha  Al-Hradat" [2:  134];  bn Nujaym,  Al-Bahr A1-ra'iq" [6:  269];
and AI-Zayla'i,  "Tabyin Al-Ha4a 'i4" [4  171].



187





Sh arf'ah  Stan dard No.  (7)  Hawalh

the payer is not sol vent then the acceptance ct the  Hawalah by the transferee remains permissible.

A Hawalah  Contract is Binding

If all its conditions are met, a Hawalah contract becomes binding without any difference of opinion among the scholars.

Form of a Hawalah  Contract

The contract of Hawalah  cannot  be concluded  on  a deferred  basis or subject  to the  happening  of a particular event,  as it  has the character  of a contract  of  (immediate)  exchange.  This  is because  by  virtue  of the Hawalah contract both the transferee (the payee) and the payer have immediately entered  into a new contractual relationship. Also, a Hawalah cannot  be concluded  on  a  temporary  basis nor  can  it be contingent  on future  events,  because this conflicts with the nature  of Hawalah which  is the immediate  transfer  of the debt to the payer!
Types and Rulings of a Hawalah  Contract
The scholars have unanimously endorsed the permissibility of restricted Hawalah,  whether  it  is  restricted  to  a  debt owed to the  transferor  by the payer or it is  restricted  to the value  of a tangible  good belonging to the transferor in the possession of the payer.  The unrestricted  Hawalah
is  permitted  by the Hanafis only.  They based this  permissibility on the
Prophet's order that a Hawalah deal must be accepted, without indicating that the payer must  be a debtor to the transferor  or not. This  shows  the permissibility of both the unrestricted  and restricted Hawalah.
The basis  for the permissibility  of a def erred  Hawalah contract  is  that
the payer is liable  to make payment to the payee (transferee) by virtue of Hawalah.  This permissibility  is  analogous to the permissibility of a  de• frred  guarantee contract. As a matter of principle,  a right  that  is due by virtue of Hawalah is similar  to a right that is  due by virtue of a guarantee

(4)  Ibn  Abidin,  "Radd  Al-Muhtar"   [5:  349];   "Durar  Al-Hukkam   F  Sharh  Majallat  Al•
Ahkam" [2:  52]; and "AI-Mawsih Al-Fiqhiyyah AI-K waytiyyah" [18:  191-192].
(5)  Al-Kasan i,  "Bada f' AI-Sana '+" [6:  16]; Al-'Tbadi,  AI-Jawharah  AI-Nayyirah"  [1:  316]; Al• Zayla'i,  "Tabyin A-Haqa 'ig" [4:  174]; and "Majallat AI-Ahkam AE-Adliyyah, article (686).



188





Sh arf'ah  Stan dard No.  (7)  Hawalh

contract. Since the latter can be concluded  on a deferred basis, so a Hawa•
ah transaction.(8
• The basis for the permissibility  of Hawalat al-Haqq (transfer of a right) as advocated by the Hanafis is  that its  essence is similar  to suretyship which is  permitted by all four schools  of Islamic law,  regardless ct the name of the contract in this regard.   Again, Hawalat al-Haqq does not significantly differ from restricted transfr  of debt. If one looks  at the change of creditor, then the transaction is one of transfer of rights, and ifone looks at the change of debtor, it is a restricted transfer of debt. 'The differences between transfer of debt and transfer of right are evident in some forms,  such  as when the creditor  makes  a gift of the amount of his debt claim against  the payer to a person who is  not a debtor to the transf ror.  Here,  there are  not two  debts,  hence  there  is  a transfer  of right and not a restricted Hawalah because of the lack  ct two debtors, as the transferor here is  not a creditor of the beneficiary from the gift.
Conditions  of Hawalah
• The basis for the necessity  of the consent of all the three parties in a Hawalah  contract is  as follows:
a)The transferor is required to consent because he might not want a third party to pay the debt on his behalf.  Therefore, his consent  is necessary for the permissibility of the Hawalah  contract.
b) The transferee  must also consent  to the  Hawalah contract because the Hawalah contract necessitates a transfr of his  right  to payment from the transferor  as  debtor to  another  person  (the  payer),  and people differ in various aspects when it comes  to payment of debts.
c) The payer must also consent in the unrestricted Hawalah because the effect  of the Hawalah contract is  to  make the  payer liable  for payment and,  as a principle;  there is no liability without there first being an acceptance of such liability."

(6)  AI-Sarakhsi,  A1Mabsut" [20:  71-72];  bn Nujym,  'Al-Bahr AI-Ra 'iq" [6:  270];  "Durar
AlHukkam" [2:  52];  and A!-Balkhi,  AlFatawa AL-Hindiyah" [3:  298]
(7)  Wahabah A1-Zuhayli,  Ai-Fiqh AL-Islami  Wa Adillatuh"  [5:  171].
(8)  Ibn Abidin,  "Radd A1-Muhtar" [5:  341]; and Mullah Khasru,  "Durar AI-Hukkam" [2: 308]



189





Sh arf'ah  Stan dard No.  (7)  Hawalh

■  The  basis for  the  requirement   that  the  transferred   debt  or the  trans• frrd part  of a debt be equal to the payable debt in kind,  type,  quality or amount  is to avoid Riba. However,  this condition does not mean that the liability of the transferor  must be  similar in quantity  to the liability of the payer towards  the transferor  in  order  to  make  a Hawalah  con• tract valid.  In other words, a Hawalah contract is permissible even if the amount  of one of the two liabilities  is  either  greater  or lesser than  the other  liability provided  that the transferee  will be paid only an amount equivalent  to  his debt.  For example, one  can transfer  the  right  to  his creditor  to collect  10 dinars,  the equivalent  amount  of his  debt,  out of the 20  dinars  be is owed.  The transforor  may also direct the transferee to collect five dinars  being his right against the payer out of the ten the transferor  owes the transferee.  'Therefore,  the similarity  in amount  that is required here is that the transferee must not take more than the actual amount  of his debt.  The intention  of this is to avoid Riba.
Effect  of Hawalah  on the Relationship Between  the Transferor  and  the
Transferee
• The  reason  for saying that  the  transfror  is   discharged  from  liability after the conclusion  of a Hawalah transaction is because this is  the legal effect ofHawalah.  Hawalah means that the other  party (the transferee) is deemed  to have received his right to payment  by the payer outright, which  connotes  its obligatory  nature.  Therefore,  the transaction can•
not  be reversed  for the simple  reason  that  if something is  transferred
then it  cannot  be argued that  it remains  in the same place.  This means the transf zree is not entitled  to ask the transf ror for payment  and the payer,  on the other  hand,  becomes  liable for payment.(o
The right  of the transferee  to have recourse,  in  the event of non-per•
formance  by the payer, to the transferor  as  advocated  by the Hanafis is based on a Hadith.  It is reported  that Uthman  Ibn Affan was asked about
a situation  in which  a transfer  of debt is concluded  and the transferee

(9)  AI-Ruhaybani,  "Matalib  Ul AL-Nuha" [3: 325]; AI Buhuti,  "KashshafAI-Qina" [3:  308]
"Hashiyat AI-Dusuqi 'Ala Al-Sharh Al-Kabir" [3:  327];  and Al-Sawi,  "Hashiyat Al-Sawi
'la Al- Sharh AI-Saghir"  [3:  426].
(10)  Tbn Qudamah,  41-Mughn [4:  338]



190





Sh arf'ah  Standard  No. (7)  Hawalah

found the payer had died in a state ct bankruptcy.  The answer was that the transferee is  entitled  to  return  to the  transferor  for payment, as the right of a Muslim cannot  go  unfulfilled. This report  reveals that the transferor has a right ct recourse to the original debtor if the payment is not attained due to bankruptcy  or death of the payer.
+  The Hadith that says, Muslims are bound by the  conditions they made
is  the basis for  the view of  the majority of  jurists that the transferee has a right of recourse to the transferor  if he had stipulated that he accepts the transfer on the basis that the payer is solvent and is capable of paying the amount  ct the debt. Moreover,  this stipulation  serves the purpose
of  the contract;  hence,  termination  of the contract  takes place if such
a condition  is  not met.(

The Effect ofHawalah on the Relationship  Between  the Transferor and
the Payer
The basis for  the rule that the transferor  loses his claim over the amount ct the debt against the payer after the Hawalah transaction  is  that the right to this claim has shifted to the transferee  by virtue of the contract of Hawalah.

The Effect of Hawalah on the Relationship  Between the Transferee and
the Payer

The basis for the rule that the transferee no longer has a financial claim against the transf ror  is  that the contract  of Hawalah  transf rs  the liability to pay to the payer.9"

The right of the payer to be entitled  to all rights associated with the securities  that  were available  to the  debtor  (the  transferor)  is  based  on the fact that  these  securities  are associated  with  the  debt  of the transfer or, which are the subject matter  of the Hawalah  contract. These rights are

(11)  Ibn  Qudamah, 4-Maughn" [4:  339].
(12)  This  Hadith has been related  by  AI-Bayhaqi  in "Al-Sunan Al-Kubra" [6:  79]  and  [7:
249],  Maktab at Dar AI-Baz; and Al-Daraqutni in his "Sunan  AI-Daraqutnt" [10:  27], Dar A!-Ma'rifah.
(13)  Ibn  Qudamah,  "AlMaughn!"  [4:  339]; AL-Buhuti,  "Kashshaf AI-Qina"  [3:  387];  and
AI-Buhuti,  "Sharh Muntaha  Al-Iradat"  [2: 136].
(14)  AI-Balkhi,  "4Fatawa Al-Hindiyyah [3:  297],  "Durar AI-Hukkam F Sharh Majallat
AL-Ahkam" [2:  36]  and AI-Kasani,  "Bada 'T A1-Sana r" [6:  18].



191





Sharf 'ah  Stan dar d No.  (7)  Hawalh

therefore   transferable with  the transfer  of the  debt  liability.  Hence,  the payer  is  entitled  to all these  rights  as well.

Eff.ect of Death  and Bankruptcy on a Hawalah  Contract
The  basis that  the  death  of the  transferor will not  affect  the  Hawalah contract  is that the transferor, after the Hawalah  contract, is not entitled  to the transferred debt.In  addition, the reason  why the death  of the payer will not affect  the  Hawalah  contract is  that  the  heirs  or the guarantor of the payer,  if any, will be liable for payment.

The practices of overdrafts, negotiable instruments and endorsing cheques and bills of exchange are valid because they are practical  applications  of the concept of Hawalah.

Transf er of Money  (Remittances)

The International Islamic Fiqh Academy has issued a resolution in respect to the permissible solutions for the combination of transfer of money (banking remittances)  and currency  exchange."


















(15)   Al-Mawsuah Al-Fiqhiyyah AI-Kuwaytiyyal  [18:  225];  "Qanun  AI-Mamalat Al• Sudani", article  (510);  and Jordanian  Civil  code, Article  (1005).
(16)  A!-Babarti,  4! 'Inayah  Sharh  AlHidayah"  ['7:  249];  A-Zaylai,  "Tbyin A!Haq4a 'i4" (4:   174]; Ibn Abidin,  "Tanqih Al-Fatawa AI-Hamidiyyah"  [1: 293]; Malik, "A! Mudawwanal" [4:  126-127];  Ibn Nujaym, AI-Bahr Al-Ra 'iq",  [6: 274]; and Al-Kasani, "Bada '?' AI-Sana'i" [6:  17].
(17)   "Durar Al-Hukkam F Sharh Majallat Al-Ahkam" [2:  36]; and Al-Mabsut" [20:  72].
(18)  International Islamic  Fiah Academy  Resolution No. 8 (1/9).



192





Sharf'ah  Standard No.  (7)  Hawalh





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Hawalah
Hawalah  is  the  transfer  ct a debt  liability  from the  transferor  to  the payer (i.e.  it is  a process ct changing  debtors  and creditors)

Muheel  (the transferor)

The transferor  is  the principal  debtor and who usually refers his creditor to a third party for the collection of the debt.  In some forms of Hawalah,  he may be a creditor.

Muhal

Muhal or the transferee  is the creditor or the party who accepts  the offer to collect his due from  the transf eror's debtor. He is  also known  as Muhal Lahu or  Muhtal  Lahu.
Muhal Alaihi
Muhal Alaihi is  the party accepting the debt liability that will be collected from him  by the transferee.  He is also  called  Muhtal Alaihi.

Hawalat al-Haqq

The transf 2r  of a right from  one creditor  to another


















193


























Shari'ah Standard No. (8)



Murabahah

(Revised Standard)




















This  standard was previously  issued by  the title  "Shari'ah Rules for Investment  and Financing Instruments No. (1) Murabahah  to the Purchase Orderer. It is reissued as a Sharf'ah standard  based on the resolution  of the Shari'ah Board to reformat all Shari'ah Rules in the form of Shari'ah Standards.












Contents


Subject                                                                                            Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        200
I.  Scope  of the Standard  ..........sos.so.so.so.so.oso.sos.o.so.o.sos.so.o.....      200
2.  Procedures Prior to the Contract of Murabahah ................        200
3.  Acquisition  of Title  to,  and  Possession  of,  the  Asset  by  the
Institution or Its Agent .......................so..........o...o...o........so...........      206
4.  Conclusion  of  a Murabahah  Contract...................................................         210

5.  Guarantees  and Treatment ofMurabahah  Receivables...............        212
6.  Date of Issuance  of the Standard.......................................................        214
Adoption of the Standard........»»sssssssssssssssssssss··ssss··sssssss··sssssss·rs.,,         215

Appendices
Appendix  (a)  Notice from Institution's Customer  af Its Performance of Purchasing  Asset or Good  As Agent for Institution,  and af Its Offer  to Purchase Item  from  Institution  According
to Contract of Murabahah  .......................a....a.....s........      216
Appendix  (b):  Notice  of Acceptance  by  Institution  of Customer's  Offer to Purchase  Asset or Good to Be Acquired, and af selling
item by Institution  to Customer...........................................        217
Appendix  (c):   Brief History  of the Preparation  af the Standard...............        218
Appendix (d):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard......................................        221

Appendix (e):   Definitions...............................................................................        230














197








IN  THE NAME OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all  the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all  his companions





Preface


The purpose of this standard  is  to explain  the Shari'ah  basis and rules for a Murabahah transaction,  the stages cf this transaction beginning from the promise to transferring ownership of the goods to the customer,  and the Shari'ah  requirements  that  need to be observed  by Islamic  financial Institutions.G






























(2) The  word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here  to refer,  in short,  to  Islamic  financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



199





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This  standard  covers the Murabahah transaction and its  various  stages, the issues relating to guarantees  before concluding  a Murabahah  deal such as promise,  Hamish  Jiddiyyah (security  deposit)  and  issues  relating  to guarantees  for recovery of the debt created by the Murabahah  transaction.

This standard  does not cover deferred payment sales that  take place on a basis other  than  that  of Murabahah.  It also does not cover other  trust and bargaining sales.

2. Procedures Prior  to the Contract of Murabahah

2/1  The customer's expression  of his wish to acquire an item  through the Institution

2/1/1  The  Institution  may  purchase   the  item  only  in  response  to its customer's wish and application, as long as this practice  is compatible  with the Shari'ah  precepts  for the contract  of sale.

2/1/2  With  due consideration to item 2/2/3,  it is  permissible for the customer  to request  the Institution  to purchase  the item  from a particular  source of supply. However, the Institution is entitled to decline to carry out the transaction if the customer  refuses offers  from  other  sources  of supply that  are  more  suitable  for the Institution.

2/1/3  The  customer's  wish to  acquire  the  item  does  not  constitute a promise  or commitment  except when  it has been  expressed in due  form.  It  is  permissible  to prepare  a single set of docu• mentation  to  be signed  by  the customer  and to  include  both the customer's  stated  wish that the Institution should  buy the item from the supplier and a promise  to buy the item from the Institution.  It is  permissible  for  the customer  to prepare  such





Shari'ah Standard   No (8):  Murabahah

a document,  or it may be  a standard  application  form  prepared
by the Institution to be signed by the customer

2/1/4 The customer  may obtain statement  ct prices from the supplier whether  they are addressed  to the customer  by name  [specific offer],  or with  no  reference  to  any named  customer   [general offer]. In the latter case,  the statement is  considered as an in• vitation to negotiate,  and not as an offer of sale.  It is  preferable that the invoice should be addressed  to the Institution so as to include an offer of sale from the supplier effective up to the end of a specified period.  The contract  of sale is  deemed concluded
once acceptance comes from the Institution.

2/2 The position  of the Institution in respect  to the application  of
the customer  for Murabahah

2/2/1  When  there is  acceptance by the customer of an offer from the supplier that is either addressed to him personally, or that has no addressee, then the sale is concluded with the customer and so it is  not permissible for the Institution  to carry out Murabahah  on the same item.

2/2/2 It is  essential  to  exclude  any  prior  contractual  relationship between  the customer who  is  the purchase orderer and  the original  supplier   of the  item  ordered,  if any. regarding the supply;  of the  item.   It is  a requirement  of Murabahah  that the  transaction between  the two parties must  genuinely, not fictitiously,  exclude  any prior  contractual relationship.

It is not permissible  to assign a contract that has been executed between  the customer  and the supplier ct the ordered  item  to the Institution.
2/2/3  The  Institution  must  ensure  that  the  party from  whom  the item  is  bought   is  a third   party  other  than  customer   or  his agent.  For example,  it  is  not permitted  for a customer to sell an ordered item to the Institution  and then repurchase it through
a Murabahah transaction.  Nor may; the party that is supplying
the item  be wholly, or by,  way,  of majority  [more  than  50%],



201





Shari'ah  Standard No (8)  Murabahah

owned  by the customer.  If a sale transaction takes place  and later  on it  is discovered  that  it was carried  out  through   such practices,  this would  render  the transaction void as it is tan• tamount to 'Inah.

2/2/4 If the  supplier  (owner)  of the  item  has  a blood  relationship or marital  relationship  with the customer, then the Institution shall verify,  before  entering  into Murabahah,  that  the  sale is not fictitious  and not a stratagem  for the sale of 'Inah.
2/2/5  It is not permissible for the Institution  and the customer to agree to form a Musharakah  in a project or a specified deal together with  a promise  from  one of them  to buy the  other's  share  in Musharakah  by means  of Mura bah ah on either spot or deferred payment  terms.  However,  it  is  permissible  for  one partner  to promise to purchase  the other's share in Musharakah  at market price or at a price to be agreed upon at the time of sale provided a new  contract is  drawn  up.  This  sale may be on spot  or on deferred payment terms.

2/2/6  It is not  permitted to carry out a Murabahah on deferred payment terms where the asset involved is gold,  silver or currencies.

2/2/7 It is  also impermissible to issue negotiable  Sukuk  where  the underlying asset consists of Murabahah receivables  or other receivables  only.

2/2/8  Likewise,  it is  not permitted  to renew a Murabahah contract  on the same commodity  that was the subject matter  of a previous Murabahah  contract with the same customer,  i.e.  to refinance the transaction.
2/3  The promise from  the customer

2/3/1  It is not permissible  that the document of promise  to purchase (signed  by the customer)   should  include  a bilateral promise which   is   binding   on  both  parties   (the  Institution  and the customer).



202





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah

2/3/2  The customer's  promise  to purchase,  and the related contrac• tual framework,  are not integral  to a Murabahah transaction, but  are intended  to provide  assurance  that  the customer  will complete  the transaction after the item  has been  acquired  by the Institution. Ifthe Institution has other opportunities to sell the item, then  it may not need  such a promise  or contractual framework.

2/3/3  A bilateral  promise  between  the customer and the Institution is  permissible only if there  is  an option  to cancel the promise which  may be exercised either by both  promisors  or by either one of them.

2/3/4  It is  permissible  for  the  Institution  and  the  customer,  after the  latter  has  given  a promise   but  before  the  execution   of the  Murabahah,  to agree  to  revise  the  terms  of the  promise whether with respect  to the deferment of payment, the mark• up or other terms. The terms ct the promise  cannot  be revised except by mutual  consent  by both  parties.

2/3/5  It   is  permissible  for the  Institution  to purchase  the item from a supplier on a "sale or return" basis, i.e., with the option to return it within a specified period. Ifthe customer then does not purchase the item, the Institution  is able  to return it to the supplier within the specified period on the basis of the conditional  option  that is established in Shari'ah. The option between the Institution and the supplier does not expire by the mere presentation of the item to the customer, but it expires by virtue of the actual sale to the customer.
It is advisable to stipulate in a stipulated option to revoke (khiyar al•
Sha rt) that the mere offer by the purchaser for the sale of the item to a third party does not invalidate the option.
2/4 Commissions and expenses

2/4/1  It is not permissible for the Institution to receive a commitment fee from the customer.



203





Shari'ah  Standard No (8)  Murabahah

2/4/2  It is not  permissible  for  the  Institution  to  receive  a fee for
providing a credit  facility.

2/4/3 The  expenses   of preparing the  documents of the  contract between the Institutions and the customer  are to be borne evenly by the two parties  (the  Institution  and the customer), provided they do not agree that the expenses  are to be borne  wholly by one party,  and provided  those expenses are proportional to the
actual amount  rt work involved,  so that they do not implicitly
include a commitment  fee or a facility fee.

2/4/4  If the Murabahah is carried  out by means of syndicated  frnanc• ing,  the Institution  which  acts as the arranger  of the syndicate is  entitled  to an arrangement fee  to be paid by the participants in the syndicate.

2/4/5  It is permissible  for the Institution  to receive a fee for a feasibility study that  it  undertakes in case such study is  requested  by the customer  and for the  benefit  thereof  and  the customer  agrees to pay the fe thereof.  The customer  is  entitled  to a copy of the study if he so requires.

2/5  Guarantees related to the commencement of the  transaction

2/5/1  It is permissible  for the Institution  to obtain from the customer (the purchase  orderer)  a guarantee (performance deed) regard• ing the  good  performance  by  the  supplier  of his  contractual obligations  towards the Institution  in his personal  capacity and not  in his  capacity  as purchase  orderer  or in his capacity  as an agent of the Institution.  Hence,  if the Murabahah  contract is  not executed, his guarantee  would still be valid  This guaran• tee is required  only in cases where the customer  has suggested a particular  source  ci supply  for the  item  that  is  the  subject matter  of the Murabahah contract.

As a consequence  of this guarantee,  the  customer  shall make good  any  damage  suffered  by  the  Institution  due to failure of the  supplier  to provide  good  performance   of his contractual obligations. These obligations concern meeting the specification





Shari'ah  Standard No (8)  Murabahah

of the  item  to be  supplied  and  the  exercise  of diligence  in executing  the contract,  non-observance of which may result in the loss  of the Institution's  time  and efforts  or property,  or in a legal  dispute and damage claims.

2/5/2  It is not permitted to impose on a customer who is the purchase orderer a guarantee regarding  hazards  that may affect the item such as damage  and  destruction during a period  of shipment or storage.

2/5/3  It is  permissible   for  the Institution,  in the  case of a binding promise  by the customer,  to take  a sum  of money  as Hamish Jiddiyyah  (security deposit). This is to be paid by the customer  at the request of the Institution, both asan indication of the financial capacity of the customer  and to ensure the compensation of any damage to the Institution  arising fram a breach by the customer of his binding promise. Having taken this Hamish Jiddiyyah, the Institution  need  not  to demand   compensation  for damage  as this may be charged  against the Hamish Jiddiyyah  The Hamish Jiddiyyah  is  not  considered   as 'Arboun  (Earnest Money).  The amount  of money deposited by the customer  as security for his commitment  can be  either held,  if the  customer   permits  the Institution to invest  it,  as an investment trust  on  the  basis of Mudarabah  between the customer  and the Institution, ex held in a current account  at  the discretion of the customer.

2/5/4  In the case of the  customer's   breach  of his  binding  promise, the Institution is  not  permitted to retain  Hamish Jiddiyyah as such. Instead, the Institution's rights are limited to deducting  the amount  of the actual damage  incurred as a result of the breach,
namely  the difference  between  the cost of the  item borne  the Institution  and  the price  at which  the  item is  sold to a third party.  The  actual  damage  to  the  Institution  may  not  include the loss  of its mark-up in  the Murabahah transaction,  that  is, its  opportunity loss.



205





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah

2/5/5 When the customer  has fulfilled his promise  and executed the contract  of Murabahah,  the Institution   must  refund  Hamish Jiddiyyah  to  the  customer.  The  Institution   is   not  entitled  to receive any amount  out of Hamish Jiddiyyah except in the case of breach of promise as laid down in item 2/5/3. It is permissible for the Institution  to agree with the customer  that the amount of Hamish Jiddiyyah  will be deducted  from the price payable by the customer  pursuant  to the contract  of Murabahah.

2/5/6 It is permissible for the Institution to take 'Arboun  (Earnest Mon• ey)  upon conclusion cf the Murabahah  sale with the customer. This  may not be done during the contractual  stage at which the customer has given his promise to purchase.  In the event that the customer  revokes the contract in an 'Arboun-based transaction, it  is  prefierable  that  the Institution,  after deducting  the actual damage it incurs,  refunds the remaining  amount  of 'Arboun  to the customer. The damage in this context means the difference between the cost of the item  borne the Institution and the price at which  the item  is sold  to a third party.

3.  Acquisition  of Title to,  and  Possession  of,  the Asset by the Institution or Its Agent
3/1  The acquisition of the asset or good by the Institution prior to its sale by means  of Murabahah

3/1/1  The Institution  shall not sell any item in a Murabahah  transac• tion before it acquires such item. Hence, it is not valid for the In• stitution to conclude a Murabahah sale with the customer before the  Institution  concludes  a urchase  contract  with the supplier di the  item  the subject matter cf the Murabahah  and before it acquires actual or constructive  possession of such items, which can be achieved when the supplier gives the Institution  control over the item  or the documents  that represent possession there• of [see  items  3/2/1-3/2/4].  Likewise, the Murabahah  is  consid• ered void in case the contract with  the supplier is  void, because





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah

in this case the Institution  would fail to acquire complete title to
the item.

3/1/2  It is  permitted that the contract between the Institution and the supplier be completed  by means  ofa meeting of the two parties to discuss the det ils, at which point the contract may be executed. Likewise,  it is permitted that the contract be completed through exchanging of the notices  of; offer and acceptance,  either  in writing  or by any form of modern communication customarily practiced according to known principles.

3/1/3  The original  principle  is  that the Institution  itself purchases the item  directly from the supplier.  However,  it is  permissible for the Institution  to carry out the purchase by authorizing an agent,  other  than  the purchase  orderer,  to execute the purchase; and the customer (the purchase orderer) should not be appointed to act  as an agent except in case of a dire need. Furthermore,  the  agent must  not sell the  item  to  himself. Rather, the Institution must first acquire title of the item and then sell it to the agent.  In such a case,  the provisions of; item
3/1/5  should be observed.

3/1/4  In cases when the customer is  authorized to purchase the item as the  Institution's   agent,  it  is  obligatory   to  adopt procedures which would ensure that certain conditions are observed.  These conditions include:
a) the Institution itself must pay the supplier,  and not pay the price  of the item into the account of the customer as agent, whenever possible.
b) the Institution should obtain from the supplier the documents that confirm that a sale has taken place.

3/1/5  It is  obligatory to separate the two  liabilities  of risk attaching to the purchased item,  namely the  liability of the Institution and the liability of the  customer   as agent of the Institution. This  is  achieved  by having an interval in  time  between the



207





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah

performance   f the  agency  contract   and  the  execution   of the  contract  of Murabahah,  as  indicated   in  the  customer's notice  of performance  of the  agency contract  to acquire  the item  and offer to purchase  the item  by means  of Murabahah [see   Appendix   (a)]  followed   by  the  institution's   notice  of its  acceptance  of the  customer's  offer  t purchase  and  the execution  f the Murabahah  sale contract  [see  Appendix  (b)].

3/1/6 The  original  principle  is  that  all documents  and  contracts concerned with the execution  of the sale of the item  must be in the name of the Institution  and not in that of the customer,
unless the latter acts as the Institution's agent in acquiring the item.
3/1/7 I is permissible,  at the  time  when  the  Institution   appoints someone  as its agent for the acquisition of the item, that the two parties  agree to  authorize  the  agent to  carry  out  the acquisi• tion of the item as agent,  without disclosing the existence of the agency agreement.  In this  case,  the agent will act  as principal in dealing with other parties, and will undertake  the purchase directly in his name but on behalf of the Institution  as principal. However,  it  is preferable  that the agent's role  be disclosed.
3/2 The  Institution's taking  possession of the asset  or good,  prior  to its sale by Murabahah

3/2/1  I is  obligatory   that  the  Institution's   actual  or constructive possession  of the  item  be ascertained  before  its sale to  the customer  on the basis of Murabahah.

3/2/2 The  condition  that  possession  of the  item  must  be taken  by the  Institution   (before  its onward  sale to  the  customer)   has a specific purpose:  that the Institution  must assume the risk of the item  it intends  to sell.  This means  that the item must move from  the responsibility  of the supplier  to the  responsibility  of the Institution.  Similarly, it is obligatory that the point when the risk of the item is passed on by the Institution  to the customer



208





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah

be clearly identified,  with reference  to the stages in which  the item  is  transferred from  one party to another.

3/2/3 The  forms  of taking  delivery  or possession  of items  differ according  to their  nature  and different trade  customs.  Taking possession  may be actual in the case of the physical delivery or transportation to the acquirer or its  agent, but may also take place constructively  by  placing of the item  at the acquirer's  disposal so as to enable him to deal with  it at his will, even though  no physical delivery has taken  place.  Taking  possession  of an item of real  property  may also take place by means  of the property being vacated  and  its  being  placed  at the  acquirer's  disposal; if the latter  is  not able  to have disposal  of the purchased  item, then the vacation of the property  is  not considered as conveying possession.  In the case of moveable assets, possession will take place in accordance  with the nature of the asset.

3/2/4  The receipt of a bill of lading by the Institution  or its agent, when purchasing goods on the  international  market,  is  considered  as constructive possession. The same would apply to the Institution's receipt of certificates of storage issued  by warehouses  following appropriate and reliable formalities.

3/2/5  The original  principle  is  that the Institution  itself must receive the  item from the  premises  of the  supplier  or from  a location that  is  specified  in the delivery conditions.  The  responsibility for the risk attached  to the item is  transf 2rred to the Institution upon its taking possession  of the item. However, it is permissible for the Institution to authorize another  party to take delivery of the item on its  behalf.

3/2/6 As  the  Institution  is   the   owner   of  the  subject   matter   of Murabahah its insurance  lies with the Institution  before selling it to the customer.  Any amount recovered  from  insurance  at this  stage  will belong  to  the  Institution  exclusively  and  the
customer  has  no  claim  to  it  even  if the  recovered   amount
exceeds the purchase price. The Institution  is entitled to include



209





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah

the expenses of insurance  in the Murabahah   cost price to be subsequently   added  to the  price  of Murabahah.   Insurance must be on the basis of Takaful whenever  possible.

3/2/7  Agency in carrying out the procedures  ct obtaining  insurance cover for the item  at the stage of the Institution's acquisition  of ownership  of the asset is permitted.  However,  it is  obligatory that the Institution  should bear the cost of insurance.

4. Conclusion  of a Murabahah Contract

4/1   It is not permitted  for the Institution  to consider that the contract of Murabahah  is automatically concluded by its mere taking possession of the asset.  Likewise,  the Institution  may not force a customer  who is  the  purchase  orderer  to  take  delivery  ct the  asset  and  pay the Murabahah  selling price,  if the  customer  refuses to  conclude  the Murabahah transaction.

4/2 The  Institution   is  entitled  to receive  compensation  for any actual damage it has incurred as a result of the customer's breach ct a binding promise.  The compensation  consists of the customer reimbursing the Institution  for any loss due to a difference between the price received by the Institution in selling the asset to a third  party and the original cost price paid by the Institution  to the supplier.
4/3 When  the  Institution  has  purchased  an asset for  a deferred  price, with the intention  that it will be sold on a Murabahah  basis,  then the Institution  is obliged to disclose to the customer that the asset is  pur• chased by the Institution  on deferred payment basis.  The Institution has the obligation to disclose to the customer, when concluding  the contract  ct sale, the details cf any expenses that it would include in determining  the cost. The Institution is  also entitled to include any expenses relating  to the item  if this  is  acceptable to the  customer. However,  if the Institution  failed to disclose any expenses, it is  not entitled  to include them  unless they  are customarily  considered  as normal expenses, such as transportation  expenses,  storage  expenses,
fees for letters  of credit and insurance  premiums.



210





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah

4/4 The Institution  is  not entitled to include in the base cost ct the item, for  the  purpose  of calculating  the  Murabahah   price,  any amounts other than  the direct expenses that are paid to a third  party. It is not permissible, for example, for the Institution  to add to the cost of the item  payments  made to its  own staff for their work,  and the like.

4/5  If the Institution has, even after the drawing  up of the Murabahah contract,  received  a discount   for  the  same  item  that  was sold  on Murabahah basis from  the supplier  of the item,  then  the customer
should benefit from that discount by a reduction af the total Murabahah
selling price in proportion to the discount.

4/6  It is an obligation that both the price of the item  and the Institution's profit on  the  Murabahah   transaction  be  fixed and  known  to  both parties  on the  signature  ct the  contract  of sale.  It  is  not permitted
under any circumstances  to subject the determination of the price  or the profit to unknown  variations  or variations  that are determinable in the future,  such as  by concluding  the sale  and making  the profit dependent  on the rate ofLIBOR that will prevail in the future. There is no objection to ref erring to any other known  indicators  during the promise  stage as a comfort indicator  to determine  the rate of profit, provided  that the determination of the Institution's  profit at the time ct concluding  the Mura bah ah is based on a certain  percentage  of the cost and is  not tied up with LIBOR or a time factor.
4/7 The Institution's profit mark-up in Murabahah must be known, and the mere mention of the total selling price is not sufficient. It is permissible that the profit be determined based on a lump  sum amount or a certain percentage of the cost price  only or of the cost price  plus  the expenses. This determination  is completed  by the agreement and mutual consent of the two parties.

4/8  It is permissible  to  agree on  the  payment  of the  price  of the  item under  Murabahah  either by short or long term  instalments, and the selling price of the asset becomes a debt that the customer is obligated to pay at  the time  agreed  upon.  It is  not permitted   subsequently  to demand  any  extra  payment  either  in  consideration   of extra  time



211





Shari'ah  Standard No (8)  Murabahah

given for payment  or for delay in payment  that  may be for a reason or no reason.
4/9  It is permissible  for  the  Institution   to  stipulate  in the  contract  of Murabahah a condition  that the Institution is free from responsibility for all or some of the defects of the asset, but not  from destruction caused  before   the  possession   of  the  customer   or  diminution   of
quantity  sold;  this  is  known  as Bay al-Bara'ah  (sale on as is basis).
In the case of stipulating  such a condition,  it is preferable  that  the Institution should  assign to the customer  the right of recourse  to the supplier  to obtain  compensation  for any def cts that are established, which  would  otherwise  be  recoverable by  the Institution from  the supplier.

4/10 The Institution shall be responsible  for pre-existing hidden  defects which appear after the conclusion  of the contract, unless it stipulates otherwise according  to item  10/4. However, it shall not be responsible for any new defects  (recent defects)  that arise after the conclusion of
the contract  and taking delivery by the customer.

4/11  The Institution  is entitled  to include,  as a condition of the contract, that  in  case  of the  customer's  refusal,  after  the  execution  of the Murabahah contract,  to take delivery  ct the asset at the prescribed time,  the Institution  could  revoke the  contract   or sell the  asset  to a third  party  on  behalf  of the  customer and  for his  account.  The Institution  could  then  recover  from  the  selling  price  the  amount due  to  it from  the  customer  under  the  contract,  and  would  have recourse   to  the  customer   for  the  balance  if that  price  were  not sufficient  to cover the amount  due to the customer.

5. Guarantees  and Treatment of Murabahah Receivables

5/1  It  is  permissible  for the Institution   to stipulate  to the customer  that instalments  may become due before their originally agreed due dates in case of the customer's  refusal or delay in paying  any instalment without  any valid reason  after the  lapse  of the time specified  in the
notice to be sent by the Institution to the customer  within a reasonable
period  of  time following the due date.



212





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah

5/2 The  Institution   should  ask  the  customer  to  provide  permissible security  in  the  contract  of Murabahah.  Among  other  things,  the Institution  may receive  a third  party guarantee  or the mortgagee  of the investment account of the customer or the mortgagee of any item of real or moveable property, or the mortgagee of the subject matter of the Murabahah  contract as a fiduciary mortgagee (or a registered charge),  either  without  taking  possession  of the  mortgageed  asset, or by taking possession  of the mortgageed  asset and then releasing the mortgagee progressively according to the percentage of the total payment  received.
5/3  It is permissible for the Institution  to require the customer to provide cheques or promissory  notes before the execution of the contract  of Murabahah,  as a guarantee  of the indebtedness  that  will be created after the  execution  of the contract.  This   is possible  on the written condition  that the Institution  is  not entitled to use these cheques or documents except on their  due dates.  The  requirement  to provide cheques as security is  not permissible in countries  where they could be presented  for payment before their due date.
5/4  It is  not permissible  to stipulate that the ownership  of the item  will not  be transferred  to  the  customer  until  the  full payment  of the selling price.  However,  it is  permissible to postpone  the registration of the asset in the customer's name as a guarantee of the full payment of the selling price. The Institution  may receive  authority  from  the customer to sell the asset in case the customer delays  payment of the selling price,  in which  case the Institution  should  issue  a counter• deed to the customer  to establish the latter's  right  to ownership.  If the Institution  sells the asset as  a result of the customer's failure to make a payment  of the selling price on its  due date, it must confine itself to recovering the amount  due to it and must return  the balance to the customer.
5/5   In the case of the Institution  receiving a mortgagee from the customer, the Institution  is  entitled to stipulate that the customer should make an assignment  to the Institution  to enable  it  to sell  the mortgageed



213





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah

asset for the purpose of recovering the amount due from the customer without recourse to the judiciary.

5/6  It is permissible   that the contract of Murabahah consists of an under• taking from the customer to pay an amount of money or a percentage of the  debt,  on  the basis of undertaking to donate it  in the event  of a delay on his part in paying instalments on their due date. The Shari'ah Supervisory Board of the Institution must have full knowledge that any such amount is  indeed spent on charitable causes,  and not for the ben• efit of the Institution itself.

5/7  It is not permissible to extend the date of payment of the debt in exchange for an additional  payment in case of rescheduling,  irrespectively  of whether the debtor is  solvent or insolvent.

5/8  When there is  default in payment by  the customer with regard to instalments  of the selling price that are due,  the amount due is  just the amount of the unpaid selling price. It  is not permissible for the Institution  to impose any additional  payment on the customer for the Institution's  benefit.  This  provision  is,  however,  subject to item
5/6.

5/9  It  is  permissible for the Institution  to give up  part of the selling price if the customer pays early, provided this  was not part of the contractual  agreement.

5/10 Ifthe customer wishes to pay in a currency different from Mura bah ah currency.,  it  is  permissible,  with the agreement of the Institution  at the  time of  payment on condition  that the payable  debt   is  paid in full or the amount agreed  to be  paid in  different  currency is  paid in full and no part of the currency; exchange  amount remains due. This  currency; exchange  may not be  stipulated  in the contract of Murabahah.

6. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 4 Rabi'  I, 1423 A.H., corresponding to  16 May
2002 A.D.



214





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah standard  for Murabahah  was adopted by the Shari'ah  Board in its  meeting No.  (4) held on 25-27 Safar 1421  A.H.,  corresponding  to 29-31
May 2000 A.D.

In its meeting No  (8)  held in Mecca on 28 Safar  - 4 Rabi' I,  1423 A.H., corresponding  to  11-16   May  2002  A.D.,   the  Shari'ah  Board  readopted a resolution  to reformat  the  Shari'ah  rules for  Murabahah  in the form  of a Shari'ah  standard.





































215





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah





Appendix  (A)
Notice from  Institutions Customer of Its Performance of Purchasing Asset or Good As Agent for Institution, and of Its Offer to Purchase Item from Institution According  to Contract of Murabahah



Notice from  the institution's customer  of its performance of the purchase of the asset or good as agent  for the institution:
From:  (The Institution's  customer  as agent)                . To        (The Institution)........
In the  performance  of my contract  of agency with you,  I  hereby inform you that I have purchased  the item  described below on your behalf and for your benefit. This item  is in my possession  on your behalf.
In accordance with my promise to you,  I hereby agree to purchase this item  from you for a total price of ...... ,  namely the cost price of
......  plus the mark-up  f .......

The payment  of this price will be in accordance with the following schedule  of instalments:







Please send the acceptance  in accordance  with this  offer.




216





Shari'ah  Standard No (8)  Murabahah





Appendix  (B)
Notice of Acceptance  by Institution of Customer's Offer to Purchase Asset or Good to Be Acquired,  and of selling  item by Institution  to Customer


Notice of the acceptance by the Institution of the customer's  offer to purchase the asset or good to be acquired:

From:  (The Institution)        .

To  (The  customer  as the Institution's  agent)..........

In  response   to  your  notice  dated   ..... ,    containing  your  offer  to purchase   the  item  described   below  which  is   owned  by  us,   we hereby  confirm  to you our  sale of the  item  to you at  a total  price of .....  comprising the cost price of . . . . .    plus the mark-up  of ..... ,  in accordance  with the conditions explained  in the general agreement to a contract ofMurabahah.

Please  send the acceptance in accordance with this offer.


















217





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah





Appendix (C)
Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (1) held on 11  Dhul-Hajjah  1419 A.H., corresponding to  27  February   1999 A.D.,  the  Sharf'ah Board  decided  to  give  priority  to the preparation of a Standard setting out the Shari'ah  rules for Murabahah.

On Tuesday 13  Dhul-Hajjah  1419 A.H., corresponding to 30 March 1999
A.D.,  the Fatwa and Arbitration  Committee  recommended to the Shari'ah Board the commissioning of a Shari'ah consultant  to prepare a juristic study and an exposure  draft of the Shari'ah Rules for Murabahah.

In its  meeting held  on  13-14  Rajab  1420  A.H.,  corresponding to 22•
23 October 1999  A.D.,  the Fatwa and  Arbitration  Committee discussed the  exposure  draft  of the  Sharf'ah  Rules  for Murabahah,  and  asked  the consultant to  make  the  amendments in light of the  comments  made  by the members.
The revised  exposure  draft  of the Sharf'ah  Rules was presented  to the
Shari'ah  Board  in  its meeting  No.  (2) held in Mecca  on  10-15  Ramadan
1420  A.H.,  corresponding  to  18-22  December  1999  A.D.  The  Shari'ah Board  made  further   amendments  to  the  exposure  draft  of the  Shari'ah Rules and decided  that it should  be distributed to specialists and interested parties  in order  to  obtain   their  comments  in  order  to  discuss  them  in a public  hearing.

A public hearing  was held in Bahrain on 29-30 Dhul-Hajjah  1421  A.H., corresponding  to  4-5  April  2000 A.D.  The  public  hearing  was attended by more than 30 participants representing central banks, institutions, accounting firms, Shari'ah scholars, academics and others who are interested in this  field.  The members  responded  to  the written  comments  that  were



218





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murababah

sent prior to the public hearing as well as to the oral comments  that were expressed in the public hearing.

The Shari'.ah Studies Committee and the Fatwa and Arbitration Committee held a joint meeting on 21-23 Muharram  1421  A.H.,  corresponding to 26-28
April  2000 A.D.,  to discuss the comments  made about the exposure draft
of the Shari'ah  Rules.  The joint meeting made the necessary amendments, which it deemed necessary in light of the discussions that took place  in the public hearing.

The Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. (4)  held on 25-27 Safar 1421 A.H., corresponding  to 29-31  May 2000 A.D., in  Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah discussed the amendments  made by the Shari'ah Studies Committee  and the Fatwa and Arbitration  Committee,  and made the necessary amendments, which  it deemed  necessary..  The  standard  was adopted  with the  name  cf
"Shari'ah   Rules for  the  Murabahah.   Some  paragraphs  were adopted  by
the unanimous  vote of the members  cf the Shari'ah Board, while the other paragraphs were adopted by the majority vote of the members,  as recorded in the minutes  of the Shari'ah  Board.

The Shari'ah  Board decided  in its  meeting No.  (7) held  in  Makkah Al
Mukarramah on 9-13 Ramadan 1422  A.H,  corresponding  24-28 November
2001  A.D.,  to pass a  resolution  to reformat  all Shari'ah  rules in a form cf
standards  and a committee was formed for this  purpose.

In its  meeting No.  (8) held  in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah  on 28 Safar
- 4 Rabi' I,   1423 A.H., corresponding to 11-16 May 2002 A.D, the Sharf'ah Board  adopted  the  reformatting  cf the Shari'ah  Rules for Investment  and Financing No.  (l)  on Murabahah  with the name of Shari'ah  Standard  No. (8)  on Murabahah.

The Shari'ah  Standards  Review Committee   reviewed  the standard  in its  meeting  held  in  Rabi'  II,   1433  A.H.,  corresponding  to  March  2012
A.D,,  in   the  State  cf Qatar,   and  proposed   after  deliberation   a   set  of
amendments (additions, deletions, and rephrasing) as deemed  necessary, and then  submitted  the proposed  amendments to the Shari'ah Board for approval  as it  deemed  necessary.



219





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah

In its  meeting  No.  (39) held in the  Kingdom  of Bahrain  on  13-15
Muharram   1435 A.H.,  corresponding  to 6-8 November  2014 A.D., the Sharf'ah  Board discussed  the proposed  amendments submitted  by  the Shari'ah  Standards  Review Committee.  After deliberation,  the Shari'ah Board  approved  the   necessary  amendments,  and  the  standard   was adopted in its current amended version.
















































220





Shari'ah  Standard  No (8):  Murabahah







Appendix  (D)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Preface on the Permissibility  of Murabahah

Definition of Murabahah

Murabahah  is   selling a commodity  as  per  the  purchasing  price  with a defined and agreed profit mark-up.  This mark-up  may be a percentage cf the selling price or a lump sum. This  transaction  may be concluded  either without a prior promise to buy, in which case it is  called an ordinary Mura• bahah, or with   a prior promise to buy submitted by a  person interested  in acquiring goods through the Institution,  in which case it  is  called a "banking Murabahah" ie.  Murabahah to the purchase orderer.  This transaction  is  one cf the trust-based  contracts that  depends  on transparency  as to  the actual purchasing price  or cost price in addition  to common expenses.

Permissibility of Murabahah

The authorities  for the permissibility  ofMurabahah are authorities on the permissibility  of sale.  Among  them is the saying of Allah, the exalted:
{"...Allah  has permitted  trade.'}.     Some  scholars  has  also  cited  to
support  the permissibility ofMurabahah  the saying  of Allah,  the Exalted:
{"It  is  no  crime for you  to seek the bounty of your Lord,"}"  arguing that  the bounty  mentioned   here  means  profit.  The  Murabahah   is  also analogous  to a form of sale called  Tawliy yah  (which  means to sell  as per the purchasing  price without  malting profit).  This is  because the Prophet (peace  be upon  him)  purchased  a she-camel  from Abu Bakr to use it as a transportation to immigrate  to Medina.  Abu Baler wanted  to give  it  to the Prophet  (peace  be upon  him) free of charge,  but the Prophet  refused

(3)  [AI-Baqarah  (The  Cow):  275]. (4)  [Al-Baqarah  (The  Cow):  198].



221





Shari'ah  Standard  No (8):  Murabahah

saying:  "I  will preferably  take  it at  the acquisition price".  The  majority  of
scholars agreed,  in principle,  on the permissibility of Murabahah.

Promise from  the Purchase  Orderer
• The  basis for the  permissibility  of responding  to the  application  of the customer   that  the  Institution   buys  the  commodity   from  a  particular supplier  is  because  such a demand  will not affect the acquisition  of the commodity  by the Institution, especially in view of the fact that this de• mand is not binding. 'The Institution  is entitled to acquire the commodity from  another  supplier  provided  the  commodity   complies  with  the  de• sired  specification.  The customer  may be forced to  fulfil his  obligation on the  basis of general  sources  of the  Qur 'an  and  Sunn ah that  require fulfilment of obligation  and undertaking.  The International  Fiqh Acade• my has issued a resolution  endorsing  a unilateral  binding  promise."° The same was adopted  in a fatwa for  Kuwait Finance  House,"  Qatar  Islamic Bank," and others.
• The basis  for   allowing  price  quotations   be submitted   in  the  name  of
customer  is  because such  an act has  no  contractual  effect  if there  is  no acceptance by the customer. The basis why it is preferred that the quotation be submitted  in the name of the Institution,  is to avoid  confusion and this
is  what was endorsed  by the Fatwas of Qatar Islamic  Bank,"and Kuwait
Finance House."
• The basis  for  not allowing a Murabahah  deal when the customer  accepts the deal directly from the supplier  is because,  by this, a sale  contract  has taken place between the customer and the supplier in which case the commodity  enters  into  ownership  of the customer.  This  ruling  will not be affected  whether  or not  the customer  has paid  the price.  This  is  be• cause payment  is  not a condition  for  the permissibility  and conclusion  of a contract  as payment of the price is  but a consequence  of a contract  and is  not principal requirement  or a condition  for regarding a contract valid.

(5)  International  Fiqh  Academy Resolution  No.  40-41  (2/5  and 3/5). (6)  Fatwa  No.  (49).
(7)  Fatwa  No.  (8). (8)  Fatwa  No.  (35). (9)  Fatwa  No.  (87).



222





Shari'ah  Standard No (8)  Murabahah

The basis for the requirement  that there must not be any contractual  com• mitment  between  the customer  and  the supplier  is to safeguard  against the contract  being a mere interest-based  financing.  Therefore,  the lack of any commitment between  the customer  and the supplier  is  a basic con•
dition  for the permissibility  of executing a Murabahah  by the Institution.
• The basis for the requirement  that the customer  must not have any (busi• ness)  connection  with the supplier is to avoid  involving in a 'Inah (sell and buy back)  transaction  that is  prohibited  by Sharl'ah.
The basis for the permissibility  that the supplier  may be a relative  of the customer or a husband or wife to the customer is because both parties have independent  legal  liability unless  it  has come to be that they are involved in a 'Inah transaction,  in which  case the transaction  is  prohibited.  This is to defeat  a potential  intentional  arrangement  to evade formalities  of the transaction.  The Fatwa of Kuwait Finance House supports this.(
The basis for not allowing a partner to promise to buy the shares of another partner  on a Murabahah basis is because this will lead to the buyer guaran• teeing the share of other partner,  which is  Riha.
The basis for not allowing dealings in gold, silver and currencies  on de• ferred  Murabahah basis is  the saying of the Prophet,  peace be upon  him, in respect  to exchange of gold with silver that such exchange take place "hand  to  hand"G    i.e.,  without  delay  in delivery, and  the  rules  of  cur• rencies are subsumed  under  the ruling for gold  and silver.  This ruling is
endorsed  by the resolution  of the International  Fiah  Academy
The  basis  for  the  prohibition   of  Murabahah  tradable  securities  or refi nancing  of a Murabahah transaction is because  these  fall under  the heading  of sale of debt  that  is prohibited  by Shari'ah.
The basis for not allowing a bilateral binding promise is  because it amounts to
a contract prior to acquisition of the item to be sold.  'The  International  Fiqh
Academy has issued  a resolution in this respect.3
• The basis for the permissibility of the agreement to amend the terms of the
promise is  because a promise is not a contract and as such the amendment

(10) Fatwa No.  (55).
(1H)  The Hadith has been related by Muslim   in his  "Sahih".
( 12)  International  Fiah Academy Resolution  No.  63 (1/7).
( 13)   International Fiah Academy Resolution  No. 41(3/5).



223





Shari'ah Standard  No (8):  Murabahah

of the profit  margin  and the duration  will not amount to rescheduling of
debt which  is prohibited by Shari'ah.
The basis for using options when  buying on Murabahah is the case of  Hib• ban Ibn Munqidh  when  the Prophet  (peace be upon  him),  said to him: if you  buy.  a condition  that there  is no cheating and that you  have a three day period for any of the goods bought.  Ifyou are satisfied,  then keep it and if you are not satisfied,  return  it to  the buyer."9 The ruling  on the application  of option  in Murabahah is endorsed by a resolution issued during the second
Fiqh  Forum  organised  by Kuwait Finance  House.
The basis for the impermissibility of a commitment fee is because such a fee is in exchange for  the right to contract, which  is  a mere intention  and wish that is  not a subject of exchange.
• The basis for  the impermissibility of a facility commission is  because  it is not allowed to receive commission in the event of giving out a loan  facility itself.  It is therefore a logical conclusion to disallow commission for a mere readiness  to finance  the customer  on a deferred  payment  basis.
■  The  basis for  allowing  that  the  expenses  of preparing the  document of contracts between  the Institution and  the customer be borne  by the two parties  is  because  both  parties will equally  benefit  from  this, and  more• over there  is no any impermissible act involved. The basis for the permis• sibility that  these expenses  may be borne  by one of the parties  is because this is a form  of condition  that  is permissible.
• The  basis  for the  permissibility of the  customer guaranteeing the  good performance of the supplier  is because  this guarantee secures  rights  and does not  adversely  affect any rules  of the Mura bah ah transaction.
The basis for not allowing  that  the customer guarantee the  risk of trans• portation of the goods  is  because  the safety of the goods  is  the responsi• bility of the owner  and  the customer  is  not the owner.  Hence,  the owner
must  bear the risk since the right to profit  is associated with bearing risk.
• The  basis for  the permissibility  of Hamish  Jiddiyyah  (security  deposit)  is because  it is  a form of guarantee  for any financial damage that may occur.
■  The basis for the permissibility of obtaining the earnest  money  to secure performance is the practice  ofUmar Ibn Al-Khattab (may Allah be pleased

(14)  The Hadith has been related  by Ibn Majah,  "Sunan Ibn Majal [2: 789].



224





Shari'ah  Standard No (8)  Murabahah

with him) in the presence of some companions  of the Prophet, peace be upon  him,  which has been permitted  by Imam  Ahmad.  A resolution has been issued  in connection with the permissibility of  'Arboun  (Earnest
Money)  by the International Islamic Fiqh Academy.

Acquisition of Title  to,  and  Possession  of,  the  Asset by the  Institution or its Agent
• The  basis  for  the  prohibition  of selling  a commodity  before  taking
possession  is  the saying of  the Prophet (peace be upon him):  "Do  not sell what you  own  not"? and the Hadith in which the  Prophet (peace  be upon him)  prohibits  a person  from selling  what he does not own 'The  basis for preferring that the Institution appoint an agent other than the purchase orderer in case of the need to do so is  to avoid a fictitious transaction  that shows  on paper that the acquisition  is  made on behalf of the Institution. This  is necessary in order that the Institution  appear as the real purchaser and in order to demarcate the liabilities of  the parties,  the liability  of the Institution  and the liability ct the purchase orderer after the sale contract.
■  The basis  for the requirement  that  the Institution  must pay the supplier directly  is to avoid the  risk of  the contract degenerating into mere interest• based financing.
■  The basis for the requirement  that the liabilities  ct the parties -in case the
Institution  acquires the goods through  agency- is  to demarcate  the two
liabilities.
■  The  basis  for  the  requirement  that  documents  must  be directed   to the Institution   is  because the  purchase  is  taking  place on behalf of the institution.
■  The basis  for the requirement  that the agent must explain to the supplier his agency status is to control the transaction and to determine the party to be referred  to for the execution of the contract.

(15)  The source of the Hadith has been stated  earlier.
(16)  Resolution  No.  72  (3/8)  in respect of 'Arboun  (Earnest Money).
(I7)  The Hadith has been related by Al-Tirmidhi  "Sunan al Tirmidhr" [3:  534].
(I8)  The Hadith has  been related by Al-Tabrani  in Al-Mu'jam  Al-Awsat"  [5:  66],  Dar Al• Haramayn, Cairo, I415  A.H.



225





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah

The basis for the  requirement  of possession  before  a sale contract  is to ensure  that  the Institution becomes  liable for  the  risk of destruction  of the commodity  before it is entitled  to sell it.
The  basis for  separating  an agency contract  from  a Murabahah  transac•
tion is  to be sure that there is no any intentional  arrangement to connect the two contracts.
The basis for  the rule that constructive  possession is sufficient to meet the
requirement  of possession and that possession  is  according  to the nature of the items is  because the Sharf'ah  did not state a particular  form  for  pos• session.  Rather this  is  left  to the customary  practices.  Again, the purpose of possession is  to enable one to have control  over something.  'Therefore, any procedure  that serves this objective would be regarded as possession.
The  basis  for  the  requirement  that  the  contract  of agency  be  separate
from the contract  of sale on a Murabahah  basis is because of the risk that the contracts  may be connected  lo each other.
The basis for the rule that the Institution  bear the expenses of insurance is  because these expenses follow ownership  of the goods.
Conclusion of a Murabahah Contract
The basis  for  the rule that the Institution is  entitled  to compensation  in case of breach of a binding  promise by the customer  to buy the goods is because of the damage that may be inflicted  on the Institution due to the act of the customer.  This is because the customer  has caused the Institu•
tion lo enter  into a deal that it  would not have concluded  in the absence of the promise.  The International Islamic Fiqh Academy has issued  a res• olution  in this respect,{
• The basis for the rule that  the  Institution's  rights  are limited,  in case of breach  of promise,  to the difference between  the cost of the item  to the Institution  and its  selling price to a third party  ii because the lawful  right in a guarantee  is limited  to the amount  that compensates  for the damage suffered and because the Institution's  right to recover loss  of its mark-up is  irrational  since there is no mark-up  unless there  is  actually a Muraba• hah transaction  and in this case there is no such  transaction.

(19)  International  Islamic  Fiqh Academy's resolution No. 40-41  (2/5 and 3/5).



226





Shari'ah  Standard  No (8):  Murabahah

The  basis  for the  requirement  of transparency as to  the  cost  price  is because  Murabahah is a trust  related  contract that  requires  disclosure Of  the  amount  and  the  currency of the  cost  price  because  a price  in a deferred  payment sale is higher.
The  basis for allowing normal  expenses  to be included  in computing  the
selling price  of the commodity  is  because these expenses are paid to a third
party.
The basis  for entitlement  of the buyer to benefit from the discount acquired by the Institution  is  because Murabahah  is a mark-up  sale.  Therefore,  if the previous purchasing  price decreases then the cost price is  the amount  that remains after the discount  and this price  is the cost price for the purpose  of the Murabahah.
The  basis for  the requirement that the price and the profit in Murabahah
must be determined is  to avoid uncertainty and lack of knowledge.
The  basis  for  the requirement  that the profit must be  separately disclosed from the  cost price and that  it is  not  allowed to be  calculated as a single amount   for  the  customer   is  because  Murabahah  is  a sale with  a profit margin.  Therefore,  it  is  necessary  this  profit  be disclosed  separately  to ensure that the customer will agree to it.
The  basis for the  permissibility of instalment payment is  because  Mu• rabahah   is  one  of the  sale  contracts that  are subject  to spot  payment, def 2rred payment or instalment payment.  The basis for the impermissi• bility of requesting an additional sum  of money  for delay in payment is because  this  is the prohibited Riha.
• The  basis for the permissibility of stipulating  a def 2ct  exclusion  item  is
because  a buyer is entitled  to require  guaranteeing hidden  defects which are related  to the sold commodity by the seller. However, the buyer may relinquish this  right  by agreeing  to a def ct  exclusion  item,  as stated  by a number of scholars,(2o
■  The  basis  for  the  permissibility   of stipulating  that  the  contract   would be  terminated  for  default  in  payment  is  because  the  original   princi-

(20)  See A!-Kasani,  "Bada 'r' AI-Sana  'r" [5: 276] Al-Mawwaq,  Al- Taj  Wa ALIkIil" [4 439]; Al-Shirazi,  41-Muhadhdhab" [1:  284]; bn Qudamah, "41-Maughnt" [4:  129]; and Al• Buhuti,  "Kashshaf Al-Qina" [3:  228].



227





Shari'ah  Standard No (8)  Murabahah

ple in respect  to  stipulations  Is  validity  and  permissibility.  In  addition, this  Item  does not  render  permissible  an impermisslble  act  or prohiblt a permisslble  act.  Hence,  this Item  falls under  the Hadith  that says  "Mus• lims are bound by the conditions  they made, except a condition  that renders permissible  an impermissible  act or prohibits  a permissible  act.
Guarantees  in Murabahah and Treatment of Murabahah Receivables The basls for the condition  that  all instalments  will become due if there ls delay  in payment  is the Hadlth  of the Prophet,  peace be upon him:  Mus• lims are bound  by the  condltions  they made,  and  because  payment  on a deferred basis ls the right of the buyer, and the buyer may choose to pay before  time  and  relinquish  the  deferral  of the  date ct payment  entirely
or make payment of all instalments  contingent  on  default on payment  of
one instalment.
■  The  basis  fa demanding  collateral  to  secure  payment  is  because  such a requirement  does not affect the contract;  rather, It consolidates perfor• mance and such guarantees are relevant  to contracts  involving credit.
The basis  for  not  allowing a stlpulation  that delays transfer  of ownership s because such a stlpulatlon  ls against the effect of a sale contract,  which s immediate  transfr of ownership. The basls for allowing the Institutlon
to hold  up registering  the commodity  in the name  ct the customer  until payment  is realised ls  that  such an actlon does not affect the transfer of ownershlp  to the buyer.
• The  basis  for the  permissibility  of stipulating  a conditlon,  whereby  the debtor in case ofi default is obliged  to donate a sum af money in additlon to the amount  of the  debt to be spent   by the Institution  on  charitable causes, is  because thls has been consldered  as  an instance of the commitment  to make a donatlon, whlch ks  well established  In the Maliki  school  oflaw. 'Thls

(21)  This Hadith has been reported by number cl the companions.  It has been related by Ahmad in his  Musnad [1:  312].  Ibn  Majah  through a good chain of transmission in his  "Sunan"  [2:  783], Mustafa  AI-Babi  AI-Halabi edition,  Cairo, 1372  A.H./1952  A.D; Al-Hakim  in his  "Mustadrak",  Hyderabad edition,  India,  1355  A.H.; Al-Bayhaqi  in his  "Sunan"  [6:  70  and 156]  and [I:  133],  Hyderabad  edition, India,  1355  A.H.;  and Al-Daraqutni in his  Sunan" [4:  228]  and [3: 77], Dar AI-Mahasin  LilTiba'ah edition, Cairo,  1372  A.H./1952  A.D.



228





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (8):  Murabahah

is the opinion of Abu Abdullah Ibn Nafi' and Muhammad Ibn Ibrahim bn
Dinar, among the Maliki jurists.G3
The  basis for  the prohibition of additional payment over the principal debt in  consideration  for  extension of time  is  because such  action  is a pre-Islamic form ofRiba.
The  basis for the permissibility of discount or rebate for earlier payment is because discount for early payment is a form of  settlement between the creditor  and the debtor to pay less  than the amount of the debt.  This is among the settlement  that are endorsed  by Shari'ah as stated in the case ofUbay Ibn Ka'b (may Allah be  pleased with him)  and his debtor where the Prophet (peace  be upon him)  suggested to him in words:  "write  off
a portion  of your debt)  The International Islamic  Fiah  Academy has
issued  a resolution  in support of this rule.99
a  The basis of the permissibility of payment of debt in another currency is that this would entail the settlement cf the debt by discharging it.  This does not involve any prohibited transaction  pertaining  to  debts either with regard to sale or purchase.
As for  some of the forms  mentioned in the standard,  there are texts to support them,  inter alia, the Hadith reported on the authority ofIbn Umar (may Allah be pleased with him)  who said:  T have met the Prophet (peace be  upon him)  at the house ofHafsah  (may Allah be pleased  with  her), and I said  to him:  'O Prophet of Allah,  I would like to ask you:  I sell a camel in Al-Baqi' for a price quoted in dinar but I take dirham,  and I sell  for a price quoted in dirham  but I  take dinars, I  take this  from this  and I give  this from this?'  The Prophet (peace be upon him)  replied:  'There is no objection
to your taking the other currency based  on the price  of the day, provided you
do  not  leave each  other with something remaining owed as a debt between
yow"5  Some of the forms  in the standard  are a kind of set-off and this is
permissible.

(22)  See  the book entitled:  "Tahrir Al-Kalam  F Masa'il Al-Hltizam" by  Al-Hattab.  This rule has been endorsed  by the resolutions and recommendations  of  the Fourth Fiqh Forum organized by the Kuwait Finance  House.
(23)  The Hadith  has been  related  by AI-Bukhari:  "Sahih Al-Bukhari" [1:  179]  and [2: 965]
(24)  The  International Islamic Fiqh Academy Resolution No. 64 (7/2).
(25)  Related   by Abu Dawud, AI-Tirmidhi,  Al-Nassa'i,  Ibn  Majah   and A!-Hakim,  who
deemed it a sound Hadith.  A!-Dhahabi agreed with Al-Hakim.  I was also  narrated without a chain  of narrators, quoting only bn  Umar:  "AL Talkhis AI-Habr" [(3:  26].



229





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murabahah





Appendix (E)
Definitions


Murabahah

It is  the sale of a commodity by an institution to its customer (the  purchase orderer)  as per the  purchasing price/cost with  a defined and  agreed profit mark-up  (as  set  out in the promise/ Wad), in which case it is called a banking Murabahah.  The  banking Murabahah  involves  deferred  payment terms,  but such deferred payment is not one cf the essential conditions f such transaction, as ther2 is also a Murabahah arranged with no deferral  f payment. In this case, the seller only receives  a mark-up that only includes the profit for a spot sale and not the extra charge it would,  otherwise,  receive for deferral  of payment.

Commitment  Fee

A commitment fe is  the percentage  or amount  which  the Institution takes from  the customer  to start  processing  the transaction even though a sale contract may not be conduded).
'Arboun
The  term  'Arboun means  an amount of money  that the customer  as purchase  orderer  pays to the Institution after concluding  the Murabahah sale,  with  the provision  that  if the sale is  completed  during  a prescribed
period,  the  amount  will be counted  as part of the price.  If the customer
fails to execute  the Murabahah sale,  then  the  Institution may retain  the whole amount.

Syndicated  Financing

A  syndicated   financing   is   a  partnership  relationship   for  financing a particular  project which two or more parties has interest  to finance.  They will  distribute   the  profit  or  revenue  as per  agreement.  In  other  words, syndicated financing is  the acceptance of a number of companies  (financial Institutions)  to enter into a joint investment transaction  through  one of the permissible  investment  instruments with an understanding that one ct the



230





Shari'ah  Standard No (8):  Murababah

parties assumes leadership  of the deal. During  the period  of the transaction, the transaction would  enjoy an independent liability separated  from  their companies.
Credit Facility

A credit  facility is  an upper  limit  for a customer's  Murabahah transac• tions.  This credit facility may be restricted  to a specified type of item,  or to a specified period of time.













































231

























Shari'ah Standard No.  (9)



Ijarah and Ijarah
Muntahia Bittamleek

(Revised  Standard)



















This  standard was previously  issued by  the title  "Shari'ah Rules for Investment  and Financing Instruments No. (2) ljarah and ljarah Muntahia   Bittamleek.  It was reissued as a Shari'ah  standard  based on the  resolution  of  the Shari'ah  Board  to  reformat all Sharf'ah Rules in the form of Sharf'ah Standards.












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        238

I.  Scope  of the Standard ..........sos.sos.so.so.so.ososoooooooooo.sos.a.....                            338
2.  Promise to Lease (an  Asset) .........sos.s.so.sos.so.sos.sos.so.so.sos.s.a......                            338
3.  Acquisition of the Asset to Be Leased,  or Its Usufruct, by the Institution       239
4.  Concluding an ljarah Contract and the Forms ofljarah.....................        241
5  Subject Matter  of  Ijarah ..........sos. sos.s o.so.sas s·sos»s o.so.s o s« sos.s o s.s.so . +..                    243
6.  Guarantees and Treatment d Ijarah  Receivables.................................    246
7.  Changes to the Ijarah  Contract...............................................................        247
8. Transfer  of the Ownership in the Leased Property in ljarah Muntahia
Bittamleek..................................................................................................        249
9.  Date oflssuance of the Standard....................................................      251
Adoption of the Standard...............................a....a....................        252
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard..............        253
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard....................................        256
Appendix (c):   Definitions.............................................................................         266



















235








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE  ALL-MERCIFUL,  THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all his companions





Preface


This standard  outlines  the  basis of the  Shari'ah  rulings  on  ljarah  and Ijarah  Muntahia Bittamleek,  beginning with the rules relating to the promise to lease,  if any,  and concluding with the rules d repossession of the leased property in an operating Ijarah  by the lessor  or transferring  its  ownership in case of Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek,  within or by the end of the lease  term. The Standard  also aims to outline  the Shari'ah  requirements  that  must be observed  by  Islamic  financial  Institutions  (Institution/Institutions)' with respect to ljarah transactions.

























(2) The  word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



237





Shari'ah Standard No (9):  larah  and Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This  standard  covers  operating leases  of properties or Ijarah  Muntahia
Bittamleek,  whether the Institution is the lessor  or the lessee.

This  standard does  not  cover  Sukuk al-Ijarah, as  they  are  covered  by Shari'ah Standard on Investment Sukuk, nor the employment of persons (labour  contract),  as it is  covered  by a separate  standard.

2. Promise  to Lease (an  Asset)

2/1   In principle,  an ljarah  contract  is  executed  for  an asset  owned  by the lessor  or an usufruct owned  by the sub-lessor.  However,  it is  for a customer to request  an Institution to acquire the asset or to acquire the usufruct of an existing  asset which  the  customer wishes  to take on lease.
2/2  In principle, Ijarah may be effected directly  on the asset without any requirement of a preceding master agreement.  However, it  is permissible to  have a master agreement drawn  up  coveringa  number of Ijarah transactions between  the  Institution  and  the  customer, setting out
the  general   terms   and  conditions  of agreement  between   the  two parties. In this case, there  may either  be a separate  lease contract for each  transaction, in a specific  written document signed  by the two parties,  or alternatively the two parties may exchange  notices of offer and acceptance  by referring to the terms  and conditions contained in the master  agreement.

2/3  It  is  permissible for the Institution to require  the customer  who has promised to lease  to pay a sum of money  to the Institution to ensure the  customer's seriousness in accepting  a lease on the  asset and  the subsequent  obligations,  provided  no amount is  to be deducted from



238





Shari' ah  Stan dard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Mu ntahi a Bittamleek

this sum except in proportion  to the actual  damage  suffered  by  the Institution  in case  the customer  does not fulfil his promise.  Thus,  if the customer,  in case  of Ijarah  associated  with a promise  to transfer ownership, breaches his promise, the promisor shall be charged either the difference  between  the  cost  of the asset  intended   to  be  leased and the total lease  rentals for the asset which  is  leased  on the basis of ljarah  Muntahia  Bittamleek  to a third  party,  or,  in case of operating
ljarah,  the  promisor   breaching   his  promise  shall  be  charged  the difference  between the cost of acquisition  and the total selling price if sold to a third  party by the Institution (promisee).  Otherwise;  i.e., in case  it is not sold, the promisee  shall not be entitled to receive any compensation.

2/4  The  amount   of money  deposited  by  the  customer as security  for his  commitment  can be either  held  on  trust  in the custody  of the Institution  in which  case the latter  cannot  invest it,  or it  may be held on an investment trust basis in which case  the customer  permits  the Institution to invest it on the basis ofMudarabah between the customer and the Institution.  It is  permissible  to agree with the customer, upon the execution of the contract of lease, that this amount  shall be treated as an advance payment  of the instalments of the lease  rental.

3.  Acquisition of the Asset to Be Leased,  or Its Usufruct, by the Institution

3/1  For the  permissibility of an ljarah  contract  concerning   a specified asset,  the lease  contract  should  be preceded  by acquisition  of either the asset to be leased or the usufruct of that asset.

3/1/1  Ifthe asset or the usufruct thereof is owned  by the Institution, which   should   in  principle   be the  case,  an  Ijarah   contract may be executed  as soon  as agreement  is  reached  by the two parties.

3/1/2 However,  if the asset  is to be acquired  by the  customer  [see item  3/2  below],  or by a third  party,  the Ijarah  contract  shall not be executed  unless  and until  the Institution has acquired that  asset.



239





Shani'ah Standard No (9):  larah  and Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek

Ownership   is  possible  under a sale contract,  even if the title is  not registered in the purchaser's name (the Institution), and the purchaser has the right to obtain  a counter-deed to establish  the actual transfer of his ownership  of the asset. [see  item  3/5 below]

3/2   An asset may be acquired  by a party and then  leased  to that party.  In this case, the ljarah transaction  should not be stipulated as a condition of the purchase  contract by which the Institution acquires the asset.

3/3  A lessee  cf an asset may enter  into a sub-lease  contract with a party other  than the owner  for  a rental  that  is   either  the same,  lower  or higher, payable either currently  or on a def erred basis, unless the owner stipulates that  the lessee should  not assign or sublet  the property  to third parties,  or should not do so without  his approval.
3/4  The  lessee may  lease  the asset  back  to  its owner  in the  first  lease period   for  a rental  that  is  lower,  same  or  higher  than  what  be  is paying,  if the two rentals are paid  on a spot  basis.  However,  this  is not permissible  if it should  lead  to contract  of  Inah,  by varying  the rent  or the  duration.  For example,  it  is  not  permissible,  if the first rental  is  one hundred dinars  payable  on a spot  basis,  for the lessee to sublet  it to the lessor  fa one hundred and  ten dinars  payable  on a deferred basis, or if the first rental is  one hundred and  ten dinars payable  on a def erred  basis,  for  the  second  to be  for  one  hundred dinars  payable instantly, or if the two rentals are of the same amount, but the payment  of the first rental  is  def zrred for one month  and the second  rental  is  deferred  for two months.

3/5  An ljarah  contract may be executed  for an asset undertaken by the lessor to be delivered to the lessee according to accurate specifications, even  if the asset so described  is not owned  by the lessor.  In this case,
an agreement  is  reached  to make the described  asset available during the  duration   ct the contract,  giving  the lessor  the opportunity  to acquire  or to produce  it.  It is not a requirement of this lease that the rental should  be paid in  advance  as long as the lease   is not executed according  to the contract  of Salam (or Salaf). Should the lessee receive





Shari' ah  Stan dard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Mu ntahi a Bittaml eek

an asset that does not conform  to the description,  then he is entitled
to reject it and demand  an asset that conforms to the description.

3/6  An Institution's  customer  may jointly acquire an asset that he wishes to lease with  the  Institution,  and  then  lease the  Institution's  share of the asset from  the Institution. In this case, the rental  specified as receivable by the Institution  should  only be in proportion to its share in the  ownership  of the  asset, since the lessee  is  a co-owner  of the asset and therefore has to pay rent only on the share that he does not own.

3/7  An Institution  may appoint  one of its  customers  to act as its  agent in acquiring  on its  behalf an asset that  is  desired  by that  customer such as equipment, machinery,  etc., whose description  and price are fixed with a view to the Institution's  leasing  such asset or assets to the  customer  after it has acquired  their  ownership  through  either actual or constructive  possession.  Although  this type of agency (for the purchase  of the assets)  is permissible,  it is  always preferred  that the agent is someone other than the customer  (prospective  lessee)  as far  as possible.
4. Concluding an Ijarah Contract and the Forms  of Ijarah

4/1   Signature of the contract and the consequences thereof

4/1/1  The  lease  contract  is  a binding  contract  which  neither  party
may terminate  or alter without  the other's  consent  [see  items
5/2/2,  7/2/1,  and 7/2/2].  However, an ljarah  contract  may be
terminated in accordance with item  7/2/1.
4/1/2  The  duration  of an ljarah  contract  must  be  specified  in the contract.  The period  of ljarah  should  commence  on the date of execution  of the  contract,  unless  the two parties  agree on
a specified  future  commencement  date,  resulting  in  a  future ljarah,  that is, an ljarah contract  to be executed at a future date.

4/1/3  If the lessor. fails to deliver. the asset to the lessee on  the date specified in the ljarah  contract,  no rental is due for the period



241





Shari' ah  Stan dard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Mu ntahi a Bittaml eek

between  the  date  specified  in  the  contract   and  the  date  of actual delivery, and the rental should  be  reduced  accordingly, unless it is agreed that the lease  be extended  by an equivalent period  after its original expiry date.

4/1/4  'Arboun  (Earnest  Money)  may be taken  in respect  of lease  at the execution  of the contract of lease,  with the lessee having the right to terminate the contract during a specified  period of time,  and  'Arboun  is   treated   as an  advance  payment  of the rental.  If the  Ijarah  contract  is not executed  for a reason attributable   to the  lessee,  the lessor may retain  the  'Arboun. However,   it   is   pref zrable   for  the  Institution  to  forgo  any amount  in excess of the  actual  damage  it has suffered.  [see para.  3/2]

4/2 Forms of the Ijarah contract

4/2/1  ljarah  contracts  may be  executed  in respect  of the same asset for different periods for several lessees, provided that two contracts  are not executed in respect of the same asset for the same period.  Such an arrangement is called "successive leases", because  each  ljarah  is   considered  as  being  successive to  the previous  one and  not  concurrent with  it on  the  basis of its being  a future ljarah.  [see  item  4/1/2  above]

4/2/2  If the lessor  signs an ljarah  contract  for a particular  asset for a specified period of time, he cannot sign  another ljarah contract with another lessee  for the duration of  the existing ljarah period or for any remaining period thereof. [see  item  7/1/2  below]

4/2/3 An  Ijarah  contract  may be signed  with  several  lessees  being entitled  to  the  same  specified  usufruct   of a particular   asset and duration  of rent,  without  specifying  a  particular  period ct time  for  a particular  person.  In this case,  each lessee may benefit  from  the  property  during  the  time  assigned  to  him in  accordance  with  specified  rules.  This  case is one  form  of Muhaya 'ah (time-sharing) in benefiting  from the usufruct.



242





Shari' ah  Standard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Mu ntahi a Bittaml eek

4/2/4 A lessee may invite others to share with him in the usufruct  he owns.  In this case, they become  co-owners  in the usufruct  of the leased  property.  This can only be done before entering into a sub-lease.  If the property  is sub-leased  after the  co-owners having owned the usufruct  each co-owner  is  entitled to a share in the sub-lease rental pro rata to his share in the usufruct.

5. Subject  Matter of Ijarah

5/1   Rules governing  benefit and leased property

5/1/1  The leased  asset must be capable  of being used while preserving the asset, and the benefit from an Ijarah must be permissible by Shari'ah.  For example,  a house or a chattel  may not be leased for the purpose of an impermissible act by the lessee, such as leasing premises  to be used as headquarters  by an Institution  dealing in interest or to a shopkeeper  for selling or storing prohibited goods,  or leasing a vehicle to transport  prohibited merchandise.

5/1/2 The  subject  matter  ct Ijarah  may be a  share  in an undivided asset held  in common  with  the  lessee,  whether  the  lessee  is a partner  with  the  lessor  or  not.  In this case the  lessee  may benefit  from  the  leased  share  in the  same way in which  the
lessor used to benefit from it,i.e., by usufruct division  based on
Muhya'ah  ie.  by identifying  a particular  time  (time-sharing) or a particular  part of the property, used alternately  by the co• owners,  or any other means  with consent  of the other partner.

5/1/3  An Ijarah  contract may be executed for a house or a chattel, even with a non-Muslim,  if the use to be made of  it is  permissible, such as a house for residential  purposes, a car for transport,  or a computer to store data, unless the lessor  knows  in advance, or has reason to presume, that the use ct the asset to be leased will be for an impermissible purpose.
5/1/4  The lessee  must use the leased  asset in a suitable manner  or in conformity with common practice, and comply with conditions which  are acceptable  in Sharf'ah.  He must  also avoid causing



243





Shari' ah  Standard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Mu ntahi a Bittaml eek

damage  to the leased  asset by  misuse  through  misconduct   or negligence.
5/1/5  The lessor  must  accept  responsibility   for  any  defects  of the leased asset which impair the intended  use ct the asset, and may not exclude his liability for any impairment that the leased asset may sustain,  either  by  his own doing  or as a result  of events outside  his control,  which  affect the benefits  intended   to be available under  the ljarah contract.

5/1/6  If the benefit from the leased asset is impaired wholly or partially as a result of the lessee's misconduct, while the property  remains under lease, the lessee is obliged to restore or repair the usuf:ruct, and rent for the time during which the benefit is lost is not to be waived.

5/1/7 The lessor may not stipulate  that the lessee will undertake the major  maintenance of the  asset that  is  required  to keep  it in the  condition   necessary   to  provide  the  contractual  benefits under  the lease.  The lessor  may delegate  to the lessee  the task of carrying   out  such  maintenance  at  the  lessor's  cost.  The lessee should carry out operating  or periodical  (ordinary) maintenance.
5/1/8  The leased asset is the responsibility of the lessor throughout the duration   of the ljarah,  unless  the lessee  commits  misconduct or negligence.  The lessor  may take out permissible  insurance on  it  whenever   possible,  and  such  insurance   expenses  must be borne  by the  lessor. The  lessor may take this into  account implicitly when the lease rental is to be fixed.  However, he may not,  after the contract is  signed,  charge  the lessee  any cost in
excess of the cost anticipated  at the time of fixing the rent. The lessor  may  also delegate  to  the  lessee  the  task  of taking  out insurance  at the lessor's  expense.

5/2 Rules governing lease rentals

5/2/1  The lease rental  may be in cash or in kind  (goods)  or benefit
(service).  The  rental  must  be specified,  either  as a lump  sum



244





Shari' ah  Standard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Mu ntahi a Bittaml eek

covering the duration  of the Ijarah contract,  or by instalments for parts of the duration. It may also be  for a fixed or variable amount,  according  to  whatever  designated  method   the  two parties  agree upon.  [see  item 5/2/3 below]
5/2/2 The rental  is  made  obligatory  by the contract  and the lessor's entitlement  to the  rental  runs  from the  time  when the lessee starts  to  benefit  from the asset or once the  lessor  makes the usufruct  of the asset available to the lessee,  and the entitlement to  the rental  does  not  necessarily  commence  on  the  date  of signing the ljarah  contract. The rental may be paid entirely in advance or in instalments  during a period equivalent,  or more or less,  to the  duration  of the  ljarah.  However,  if the asset is made available only after a period longer  than what customary practices deem proper,  then no payment  shall be  obligatory.

5/2/3 In case  the  rental  is  subject  to changes  (floating rental),  it  is necessary that the amount of the rental of the first period of the ljarah contract  be  specified in lump sum. It is  then permissible that the rentals for subsequent  periods  be determined  accord• ing to  a certain  benchmark.   Such  benchmark   must  be  based on a clear formula  which  is  not subject to dispute,  because it becomes the determining  factor for the rentals of the remain• ing periods. This benchmark  should be subject   to a ceiling, on both maximum  and minimum  levels.

5/2/4  It may be agreed that the rental should consist of two specified parts:  one to be paid or transferred  to the lessor  and the other to be held by the lessee to cover any expenses or costs approved by the lessor, such as the cost of major maintenance, insurance,
etc.  The excess of the second part  of the rental shall be treated as an advance  to the lessor  on account,  while  the lessor  shall bear any shortage.

5/2/5 The amendment of future rentals is permissible by the agreement cf both parties, i.e. the periods  for which the lessee has not yet received any benefit. The rentals of  any previous periods which



245





Shari' ah  Standard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Mu ntahi a Bittamleek

have not yet been paid become a debt owed to the lessor  by  the lessee,  and therefore cannot be increased.

6. Guarantees  and Treatment  of Ijarah Receivables

6/1  Permissible  security,  of all kinds, may be taken  to  secure the rental payments or as a security against misuse or negligence on the part ct the lessee,  such as a charge  over assets, guarantees or an assignment ct rights over assets of the lessee  held   by third parties, even if such rights are a permissible  life or property insurance indemnity in favour of the lessee.

6/2  The two parties may agree that the rental be paid fully in advance.  It is  also permissible to make the rent payable in instalments, in which case the lessor  may stipulate that the lessee  should immediately pay the remaining  instalments  if he,  after receiving a specified period of
due notice,  delays, without a valid reason,  payment ct one instalment
or more, provided that the asset shall be made available for: the lessee to  use  for  the  remaining  period  of time.  Any  stipulated  upfront rental or accelerated  -because  of delay of payment-  rental is  subject to settlement  at the end of the ljarah period  or,  if the Ijarah  contract is  terminated  earlier,  at the time of such termination.  Any extension of time by the lessor  after the stipulated  time  for prompt  payment is  considered  as a consent  to  def rral  of payment  throughout   the extension  period  and not a right of the lessee,  subject always to item
5/2/2  above.

6/3 No increase  in the rental due may be stipulated  by the lessor  in case of delay in payment by the lessee.

6/4  It  may be  provided  in  the  contract  of  Ijarah  or  ljarah  Muntahia Bittamleek  that  a lessee  who  delays  payment  for  no  good  reason undertakes  to donate  a  certain  amount  or percentage  ct the rental due  in  case  of  late  payment.   Such   donation   should  be  paid  to charitable  causes under the co-ordination  of the Institution's Shari'ah Supervisory  Board.
6/5  In case of foreclosure  of the  security  provided  by the  lessee,  the lessor may deduct from  such  amounts only  what is due in  respect



246





Shari' ah  Standard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Mu ntahi a Bittaml eek

of  rental   for  previous   periods,  and   not   all  rental  instalments, including instalments which  have not yet fallen  due and  in respect of periods for which  the lessee has not had the benefit  of the leased asset. The  lessor  may  also deduct   from  the  security  all legitimate compensations necessitated by the lessee's breach  of contract.

7.  Changes to the ljarah  Contract

7/1   Selling of or damage to the leased  asset

7/1/1  If the lessor sells the leased asset to the lessee, the ljarah contract is  terminated  due to the transfer of the ownership  of  the leased asset and ownership  of usufruct  to the lessee.

7/1/2  The lessor  may sell the leased asset to a third  party other  than the lessee, and the title to the asset together with the rights and obligations  of the  lessor  under  the  ljarah  contract is  thereby transferred  to the new owner,  because  the asset and the rights and  obligations  attached  to it  become  the  right  of the  third party.  The  lessee's  consent  is  not  necessary  when  the  lessor
decides  to sell the asset to a third  party.  If the purchaser   does
not know about  the ljarah  contract, he may terminate the sale contract,  but  if he knows about  it and consents  to it,  he takes the place of the previous  owner in his entitlement to the rental for the remaining period.
7/1/3  In case of total destruction of the leased asset, the ljarah contract is  terminated if it is concluded  on an identified  asset. In such a case,  it may not be stipulated  that the rest of the instalments should  be paid.
7 /1/4 The leased asset in the  possession  of the  lessee  is  held by the lessee in a fiduciary  capacity on behalf of the lessor.  The lessee will not  be held  liable  for  any damage  or destruction  of the leased asset unless  such  damage  or destruction is  a result  of misconduct or negligence on the part of the lessee.  In this case, he is  obliged  to replace the asset if it is replaceable;  otherwise, he is  liable for the amount  of the damage  to be determined by valuation.



247





Shari' ah  Standard No  (9):  larah  and Ijara h Mu ntahi a Bittaml eek

7/1/5  In case of the partial  destruction of the leased asset in a manner that  impairs  the  benefits  expected  from  the  leased  asset, the lessee  may  terminate  the ljarah   contract.   Both  he and  the
lessor  may  also agree  to  amend  the  rental  in case ct partial
destruction  of the leased property,  if the lessee waives his right to termination.  The lessor  in this  case is   not  entitled to  rent for the period  during  which  the lessee was not  able to benefit from the asset unless the lessor makes it up (by agreement with the  lessee)  with  a like  benefit  after  the  expiry  of the  period specified in the contract.  [see para.  5/1/6]
7/1/6  In an ljarah Mawsufah fi al-Dhimmah  (contract  for an unidenti• fied  asset undertaken  by the lessor  to be delivered according  to the agreed specifications),  the owner in cases ct total and partial destruction  must offer an alternative asset having a specification
similar to that of  the destroyed  asset,  unless otherwise  agreed  at the time. The Ijarah shall continue  for the remaining  time ct the contract. If it  is not possible to provide a substitute asset, the con• tract will be terminated.  [see item  3/5]

7/117  If the  lessee  stops  using  the  leased  asset  or  returns   it  to  the owner  without  the  owner's  consent,  the  rental  will continue to  be due  in  respect  of  the  remaining  period   of the  ljarah, and  the  lessor  may  not  lease  the  property:  to  another lessee for this period,  but must  keep it at the disposal  of  the current lessee unless the lessee relinquishes to the lessor the remaining
period  ct time,  in which  case the lease expires.  [see  item 7/2/ 1
below]

7/2  Termination,  expiry  and renewal  of the ljarah contract

7/2/1   It is  permissible  to terminate  the lease contract  by mutual  con• sent but it is not permissible  for one party to terminate  it except in case of force majeure  or there  is  a defect  in the leased  asset that materially impairs its use. 'Termination is also possible when one party secures  an option  to terminate the contract in which case the party who holds the option  may exercise it during  the specified  period.



248





Shari' ah  Standard  No.  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Muntahia  Bittaml eek

7/2/2  The lessor may stipulate that the ljarah contract  be terminated
if the lessee does not pay the rent or fails to pay it on time.

7/2/3  An Ijarah contract  does not terminate with the death  of either party  thereto.  However,  the heirs  of the lessee may terminate the  Ijarah  contract if they  can prove  that  the  contract  has become,  as a result  of the  death  cf their  legator,  too  onerous for their  resources  and  in excess cf their  needs.

7/2/4 An  ljarah  contract   expires  with  the  total  destruction  of the leased  asset  in the  case of leasing  a specific  asset or with  the inability  to enjoy the usufruct  owing to the loss  of the benefit that the asset was intended to provide.

7/2/5 The  two parties  may  terminate the  ljarah  contract before  it begins  to run.
7/2/6  The lease  expires upon the expiry of its term, but it  may remain operative  for a good cause, such as the  late arrival to the place intended  in the lease  of transportation  vehicles, and in the case of a late  harvesting  period  for  land  leased  for  crop cultivation. The lease then continues  with the rental based on the prevailing market value. An ljarah  may be renewed  for another term, and such renewal may be made before the expiry of the original term or automatically  by adding  a provision  in the new contract  for such renewal when the new term starts, unless either party serves a notice on the other of its desire not to renew the contract.
8. Transfer  of the Ownership in the Leased Property  in ljarah Muntahia
Bittamleek

8/1   In Ijarah  Muntahia   Bittamleek,  the method  of   transferring   the title in the leased  asset to  the  lessee  must  be  evidenced  in a document separate from the ljarah contract document, using one cf the following methods:

a)  By means of a promise to sell for a token or other consideration, or by accelerating  the payment  of the remaining  amount  cf rental, or by paying the market value of the leased property.



249





Shari' ah  Standard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Mu ntahi a Bittaml eek

b)  A promise  to give it as a gift (for  no consideration).

c)  A promise  to give it as a gift, contingent upon the payment  of the
remaining instalments.

In all these cases, the separate  document  evidencing  a promise of gift, promise  of sale or a promise  of gift contingent  on a particular event,  should  be independent of the contract  of ljarah Muntahia Bittamleek and cannot  be taken as an integral  part  ct the contract of Ijarah.

8/2  A promise  to  transfer  the  ownership  by way of one of the  methods specified in item  8/1  above is a binding promise by the lessor. However, a binding promise is  binding  on one party only,  while the other party must have the option not to proceed. This is to avoid a bilateral promise by the two parties which is Shari'ah  impermissible  because it resembles a concluded contract.

8/3  In all cases of transfer  af ownership  by way of gift or sale, it is  neces• sary, when  the promise is  fulfilled, that a new contract  be  drawn  up, since  the  ownership  to the  property  is  not automatically transferred
by virtue af the original promise  document  that was drawn up earlier.

8/4  In case the ljarah contract  is combined, through  a separate document, with  a gift  contingent  upon  the  condition  that  the  remaining   rent instalments be paid, the ownership to the leased property  is transferred to the lessee if the condition  is fulfilled, without the need for any other
procedure  to be  adopted  or a document  to be signed.  However,  if the
lessee's payment  is  short of even one instalment, the ownership to the property  is  not transferred to him,  since the condition has not been fulfilled.

8/5  If the leased asset was purchased from the lessee before it was leased back  to  the  lessee   on  the  basis  of Ijarah  Muntahia  Bittamleek, a (reasonable)  period  of time, between  the  lease contract and  the time  of the  sale  of the  asset  to  the  lessee,  must  have  expired,  to avoid  the  contract of 'Inah.  This  period   must  be  long  enough   so that the leased property or its value could  have changed.  This shall



250





Shari' ah  Standard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Mu ntahi a Bittaml eek

also apply  to the  case of early ownership of the asset  where  a sale contract is concluded during the ljarah.  [see para.  7/1]
8/6  Subject  to item  8/8  below,  the  rules  governing ljarah  must  apply to the ljarah  Muntahia Bittamleek,  i.e.  when  a promise is made  by the lessor to transfer  the ownership  in the leased  asset to the lessee. None  ct these  rules  should  be breached under  the pretext  that  the leased asset was bought  by the lessor on the basis of a promise  by the lessee that he would acquire  it or that ownership  of it would devolve upon  him,  or that  he would  pay rentals  in excess of those  payable in respect  of a similar  property which  are similar  in amount  to the instalments of an instalment sale, or that local laws and conventional banking  practices consider  such  a transaction as an instalment sale with a deferred transfer of the ownership.
8/7  Transfer  of the  ownership   in the  leased  property cannot  be made by executing, along with the ljarah,  a sale contract that will become effective on a future  date.

8/8  If the leased asset is  destroyed  or if the continuity of the lease  contract becomes  impossible  up to the expiry period  without  the cause being attributable  to  the  lessee  in either  case,  then  the rental  is  adjusted based on the prevailing  market value.  That  is,  the difference  between the  prevailing  rate of rental  and  the rental specified  in the contract must  be refunded  to the lessee if the latter  rental  is  higher  than  the former. This is to avoid loss to the lessee, who agreed to a higher rental payment  compared  to the prevailing  rate of rental in consideration  ct the lessor's promise to pass the title to him upon the expiry of the lease term.

9. Date  of Issuance of the Standard

This  Standard was issued on 4 Rabi' I, 1423  A.H., corresponding to 16 May
2002A.D.










251





Shani'ah Standard No (9):  larah  and Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah standard  for ljarah and Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek was adopted by the Sharf'ah  Board  in its meeting No.  (4) held  on 25-27 Safar
1421  A.H.,  corresponding to 29-31  May 2000 A.D.

In its meeting No. (8) held  in Mecca on 28 Safar - 4 Rabi' I,  1423 A.H. corresponding   to  11-16  May 2002  A.D.,  the  Sharf'ah  Board  readopted a resolution to reformat the Sharf'ah rules for ljarah and ljarah Muntahia Bittamleek in the form of a Shari'.ah standard.






































252





Shari' ah  Standard  No.  (9):  ljarah  and Ijarah  Muntahia  Bittaml eek





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (1) held on 11  Dhul-Hajjah  1419 A.H., corresponding to  27 February  1999  A.D.,  the  Shari'ah  Board  decided  to  give  priority to  the  preparation  of the  Shari'ah  rules  for Ijarah  and  Ijarah  Muntahia Bittamleek.
On  Tuesday  13  Dhul-Hajjah  1419  A.H.,  corresponding to 30 March
1999  A.D.,  the Fatwa and Arbitration  Committee decided  to commission a Shari'ah  consultant to prepare  a juristic  study  and  an exposure  draft en the Shari'ah  Rules for ljarah  and ljarah  Muntahia Bittamleek.
In its meeting  held on  13-14  Rajab  1420  A.H.,  corresponding to 22-23
October  1999 A.D., the Fatwa and Arbitration Committee discussed the exposure draft of the Shari'ah Rules for ljarah and ljarah Muntahia  Bitamleek, and asked the consultant to make the amendments in light cf the comments made by the members.
The  revised  exposure  draft of the  Shari'ah  Rules  was  presented  to  the
Shari'ah  Board in  its meeting No.  (3) held in Mecca on 10-15  Ramadan  1420
A.H., corresponding to 18-22 December  1999 A.D. The Sharl'ah Board made further  amendments to the exposure  draft of the Shari'ah  Rules and decided that  it should  be distributed  to specialists  and interested  parties  in order  to obtain their comments  in order to discuss them in a public hearing.

A public  hearing was held in Bahrain  on 29-30 Dhul-Hajjah  1421  A.H., corresponding to 4-5 April 2000 A.D.  The public  hearing  was attended  by more  than   30 participants  representing  central   Institutions,  accounting firms,  Shari'ah  scholars,  academics  and  others  who  are interested in this field. The members responded  to the written  comments  that were sent prior



253





Shari'ah  Standard No.  (9):  ljarah  and Ijarah  Muntahia  Bittamleek

to the public  hearing  as well as to the oral comments  that  were expressed in the public hearing.

The Shari'ah Standards Committee  and the Fatwa and Arbitration  Com• mittee held a joint  meeting  on 21-23 Muharram   1421  A.H.,  corresponding to 26-28 April 2000 A.D. to discuss the comments  made about the Shari'ah Rules.  The committee  made the amendments which it considered  necessary in light of the discussions  that took place in the public hearing.

The Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. (4) held on 25-27 Safar 1421 A.H. corresponding to 29-31 May 2000 A.D., in  Al-Madinah   Al-Munawwarah discussed  the amendments  made  by the Shari'ah  Studies  Committee   and the Fatwa and  Arbitration  Committee,  and made  the amendments which
it  considered  necessary.  Some paragraphs ct the standard  were adopted  in the  name  d' Shari'ah  Rules for Ijarah  and  Ijarah  Muntahia   Bittamleek  by the unanimous vote of the members  of the Shari'ah  Board,  while the other paragraphs  were adopted by the majority vote of the members, as recorded in the minutes  of the Shari'ah  Board.

In its  meeting  No.  (7) held  on 9-13  Ramadan  1422  A.H.  corresponding to  24-28 November  2001  A.D.,  in Makkah  Al-Mukarramah,  the  Shari'ah Board decided  to convert  all Shari'ah  rules for Investments and Financing to Standards  and a committee  was formed  for this purpose.

In its  meeting  No.  (8) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah en 28 Safar
- 4 Rabi' I,  1423 A.H. corresponding to  11-16 May 2002 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board  adopted   the  reformatting  of   Shari'ah  Rules  for  ljarah  and  ljarah Muntahia  Bittamleek  in the  name  of Shari'ah  Standard  No. (9)  on ljarah and Ijarah  Muntahia  Bittamleek.  The committee  did not make any changes to the substance.

The  Shari'ah  Standards  Review  Committee reviewed  the  standard  in its meeting held in Rab'  II,  1433 A.H. corresponding to March 2012 A.D, in the State of Qatar, and proposed after deliberation a set of amendments (additions, deletions, and rephrasing) as deemed  necessary, and then submitted  the proposed amendments to the  Shari'ah  Board  for approval as it  deemed  necessary.



254





Shari'ah Standard No (9):  ljarah  and  Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek

In  its  meeting  No.   (39)  held  in  the  Kingdom   of Bahrain   on  13-15
Muharram   1435  A.H.,  corresponding  to  6-8  November  2014  A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Board  discussed  the  proposed   amendments  submitted   by  the Shari'ah  Standards  Review  Committee.  After  deliberation,  the  Shari'ah Board approved necessary  amendments,  and the standard  was adopted  in its current  amended  version.
















































255





Shari' ah Standard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Permissibility  of Ijarah  and ljarah  Muntahia Bittamleek
ljarah  derives permissibility  from  the Qur 'an,  the Sunnah,  consensus
of Fuqaha and Ijtihad (reasoning).
+  On  the  level  of the  Qur 'an,  Allah,  the Almighty,  says:   {"said  one of them 'O my father  engage him on wages"},and {"ifyou had wished, surely you could have exacted some recompense for it}!
■  The authority for the permissibility of ljarah  in the Sunnah  is the saying of the  Prophet  (peace  be upon  him):   "Whoever   hired  a  worker  must
inform him of his wages",'and his saying:  "Give a worker  his wages before
his sweat  (body odour)   is dried".9
■  The permissibility  of Ijarah also generated  consensus  among the legal community.  The  ljarah  is  also acceptable  by  reasoning  because  it is a convenient  means for people to acquire  right  to use assets that they do not own since not all people may be able to own tangible assets. The Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek,  on the other hand,  is  not different in its rules  from an ordinary ljarah,  except that it is  associated with a promise by the lessor  to  transfer  ownership  at the end of the  ljarah  term.  The
permissibility of this form  of Ijarah  is  confirmed  by the  resolution  of International  Islamic Fiqh Academy which explained the impermissible and the permissible forms of ljarah Muntahia Bittamleek.
■  It must  be noted  that  the  permissible  Ijarah  Muntahia  Bittamleek  is
different from hire-purchase  as commonly practised by the conventional

(3)  [Al-Qasas  (The  Narrative):  26). (4)  [AI-Kahf (The  Cave):  77].
(5)  This Hadith  has been related  by Ibn Majah  in his Sunan" [2: 817];  and Al-Haythami  in
"Majan' Al-Zawa'id"  [4:  98]
(6)  This Hadith  has been reported  by Ibn Majah in his "Sunan" [2:  817];  and A!-Tabrani in
41-Mjam Al-awsaf; and Al-Haithami in Majam' Al-Zawa'id"  [4:  98].
(7)  Resolution of the International  Islamic Fiqh Academy No.  110 (4/12).



256





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Muntahia  Bittamleek

banks in the following respects.  In hire-purchase, the terms and provisions of sale and leasing  are applied to the  subject  matter   at the  same time, and subsequently  the ownership of the  subject matter   is transferred  to the lessee (buyer),  once he pays the  last instalment without the need for a separate contract for the transfer of ownership. In the permissible Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek, on the other hand, the provisions governing ljarah are applied  to the leased asset until the end ct the Ijarah term, after which the lessee obtains  ownership of the asset in the manner explained in this Standard.
• It must be noted also that the ljarah contract intended in this Standard is the  lease  of tangible assets (chattels  or property),  which is  a contract giving a legal title to legitimate and identified usufruct  for a defined period of time in exchange for  a legitimate  and determined consideration.
Promise to Lease an Asset
The basis for allowing  the  Institution to demand payment of money by a party who has promised to take the property as lessee  is the need to confirm the commitment of the promissor.  This is  because  a binding promise has financial implications  if the promissor  retracts the  promise.  The request for payment of a commitment fze is  to cater for financial  damage  that the Institution  may have incurred as a result   of the promissor  taking back the promise or defaulting in payment. The unified Shari'.ah  Supervisory Board of Al Baraka issued a Fatwa in respect to Hamish Jiddiyyah (security deposit) in Murabahah. CBI   This  ruling is  also applicable  to Ijarah.

Acquisition of the Asset to be Leased,  or Its Usufruct, by the Institution
■   The basis for not allowing the leasing of an asset that is  not owned  by the lessor   is  the Hadith  that prohibits one from selling what he  does  not own,"and ljarah proper is a sale of usufruct.  The basis for allowing the leasing back of an asset to the person from whom the asset was acquired is because such  a transaction does not involve  any Inah sale.
■  The basis for not allowing a simultaneous combination of Ijarah and sale is  because making purchase contracts  contingent  upon leasing contracts is impermissible by an explicit text in the view of a number

(8)  International Islamic Fiqh Academy  Resolution No.  110 (4/12).
(9)  Fatwa of Unified  Shari'ah  Board of Al Baraka No.  (9/10).



257





Shari' ah  Stan dard No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Muntahia Bittamleek

of jurists.  This is prohibited  by a well-known  Hadith  which prohibits two sales in one sale. (o)
The  basis  for the  permissibility  of sub-leasing  when  the  lessor  has allowed it is because the lessee has ownership af the usufruct  by virtue of the Ijarah contract, in which case he is entitled to transfer such usufruct for consideration  as he deems fit. The basis for impermissibility of sub• leasing when the lessor has not allowed it is because the ownership  of usufruct  by the lessee is  limited  in which case the lessee is  obliged to consider  any limitations  on this ownership.
• The basis  for the  permissibility of leasing a property  on  the basis  of specifications even if the lessor  does not own it is that this will not lead to dispute,  in which case it is  similar to a Salam  contract.  However,  in
this case the lessor should not request advance payment  of the rentals according to one of the views of the Shafi'is  and Hanbalis.
• The basis  for pref zrring  that the agent who purchases on behalf of the
Institution  be someone  other  than  the  customer  (lessee)    is  to  avoid fictitious  transactions  and to demonstrate  the genuine role of the Insti• tution  in making the usufruct  of the asset available  to the lessee.
Contract of ljarah
• The basis for the binding  nature of an ljarah contract is  because ljarah is  one  of the  contracts  for  transf zrring  ownership  that  depends  on an  exchange  of counter-values.  The  Shari'ah  principle  is  that  these contracts are binding because of the Saying of Allah, the Almighty:  {:...
Fulfil (your) obligations."}.   The  basis for allowing cancellation  of
an ljarah contract  due to contingencies  is because without the right to cancel the ljarah contract  the lessee would waste money by paying rent for unneeded  usufruct  due to an event of which he did  not contribute
to the occurrence.
• The basis  for requiring a designated term for the lease  is because without such a designated   term  there would be an uncertainty  that might  lead to dispute.  The basis for allowing an ljarah contract take effect  based on

(I0)  The Hadith  has been  related  by Abu Dawud in his "Sunan" [3:  283]
(II)  The Hadith has been related  by  Ahmad,  Al-Nas'i  and ATirmidhi.  Al-Tirmidhi
autheticated the Hadith: see, Nay! Al-Awtar" [5:  248].



258





Shari' ah  Standard No  (9):  ljarah  and Ijarah  Mu ntahi a Bittaml eek

future  events is  because ljarah  is,  unlike  a sale contract, a contract that involves time  and  for this it  is  relevant that  it  be contingent  on future events.
• The basis for the permissibility of obtaining  'Arboun  (Earnest  Money)
to secure  performance is the  practice  of Umar  Ibn Al-Khattab   (may Allah be pleased with him)  in the presence  of some companions of the Prophet  (peace be upon him). This practice  is also permitted by Imam Ahmad. A resolution  has been  issued in connection  with  the permis• sibility of 'Arboun (Earnest Money)  by the International  Islamic Fiqh Academy.3
■  The  basis for  the  impermissibility  of re-leasing  after the  lease of the asset is that under  the first contract,  the usufruct of the asset no longer belongs to the owner, and a new contract  may not be signed with another lessee before  the  contract  with  the  first  lessee is  terminated.  Hence, this form of ljarah  is not suitable as an investment  instrument, because it  constitutes an impermissible sale of the rent  receivable  pursuant   to providing  new lessees with  an asset already  leased out  to the existing lessee.  The  form just  described  is  different   from  the  transfer,  by the owner,  of the ownership  of the leased  assets to an investor, so that the latter takes his place,  wholly or partially,  with  regard to the ownership of all or some  parts of the  assets,  as well as in the  ownership   ct the usufruct  of, and entitlement  to his  share of the rent from,  those  assets. Al Baraka Forum  has issued a resolution  disallowing  multiple  leases of the same asset after the first ljarah  contract.G
+  The basis for allowing successive leases on the same specified usufruct of
a particular  asset without  specifying a particular period  for a particular person  is  because the usufruct  -in line with  the term  assigned  to each party-  can accommodate the parties.  The justification for  not allowing a specific  term  for each person  is  that  each  party  will know the term to which  he is  entitled  in his turn  and  because  their  applications  are considered in  order.  This rule  was supported by a resolution of Al Baraka
Forum.99

(12)   [AI-Ma' idah (The  Table):  1].
(13)   Resolution  No.  72  (3/8)  in respect of 'Arboun  (Earnest  Money). (14)   Resolution  No.  (13/4).



259





Shari'ah Standard No.  (9):  larah  and Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek

The basis for the requirement  that incorporating co-lessees must take place before any sub-lease contract is signed  is because sub-leasing the property means the sub-lessor no longer  owns the usufruct,  and thus he would be leasing out a benefit cf the usufruct that he does not own, which  is not permissible in Shari'ah as stated earlier. The jurists have considered  a bankrupt  lessor -a  person who leases things he does not own- among those who must be restricted in using their property.
Subject Matter of ljarah
• The basis for the requirement  that the leased  asset must be capable of being used while preserving the asset is  that the subject of a lease is usufruct and not the asset, as leasing is not possible for things that perish by use. The basis for the requirement that benefit from Ijarah must be permissible  is  that leasing an asset that will be used in impermissible way makes the lessor an accomplice in doing evil and this is prohibited as  per the saying of Allah,  the Almighty:  {"Help  you one another in Al-Birr and At-Taqwa (virtue,  righteousness  and piety)}9
■   The basis for the  irnpermissibility of stipulating a defect exclusion clause in respect to the leased asset is that such a condition defeats the purpose of the contract,  which  is  exchange of usufruct  for  rentals.  If the usufruct is partially or wholly impaired, the receipt of the rentals by the lessor becomes a form of unjust enrichment.  The resolution of the International  Islamic Fiqh Academy has declared that the lessor must accept responsibility for any destruction  or impairment  of the leased asset insofr as these events are not sustained as a result of misconduct or negligence on the part  of the lessee.9 The Fatwa of the unified Shari'ah Supervisory Board of Al Baraka states that the lessor is  not entitled to exclude his liability in respect of defects in the leased asset.(
■  The reason why the lessor may not stipulate that the lessee will undertake the major maintenance of the leased asset is that this condition def 2ats the purpose of an ljarah  contract.  Again,  it is the duty of the lessor to ensure that the usufruct  is  intact, and this is  not possible unless the asset is  maintained  and kept safe so that the lessor  may be  entitled

(15)  Resolution  No. (10/1).
(16)  [AIL-Ma' idah (The Table):  2].
( 17)  International Islamic  Fiqh Academy Resolution No.  13 (1/3).



260





Shari' ah Standard  No.  (9):  ljarah  and Ijarah  Muntahia  Bittamleek

to the  rentals  in consideration   for  the  usufruct.   The  unified  Shari'ah
Supervisory  Board  of Al Baraka issued a fatwa supporting  this.9
The reason why insurance expenses must be borne by the lessor  is that the owner of the asset is responsible  for insuring  it,  and the lessor  is the owner. 'This  is supported  by the resolution  issued by the International Islamic Fiqh Academy.09
• The basis for the permissibility of using a certain  benchmark or price index to determine rentals of subsequent periods  after the expiration of  the  first  period  of  an  ljarah   contract  is   that   the  rentals   will subsequently be known.  This  is  similar  to the  principle  of Ujrat al• Mith/ (prevailing market  rate of rental)  and does not lead to dispute. Again,  using a benchmark to determine  the rentals  is  to the benefit cf all parties  since there  is  possibility  of rental  fluctuation  that  may be in favour  of either  the lessee  a the lessor  in view of the fact that the contract  remains  binding  on both  parties  throughout its term.  This rule is supported by a Fatwa issued  during  Al Barakas IL  Forum.
The  basis  for  the  permissibility   of restructuring   the  rentals  for  the
future  periods is  that such an act is deemed to create a new contract  for a new term for  which the rentals are not yet due.  Hence,  the rentals  are not  regarded  as a  debt,  in which case the prohibition  of rescheduling rentals in return  for higher payment is  not applicable to this.  However, increasing previously agreed rentals in exchange for a def zrred  period of payment is a form of Riba.
Guarantees and  Treatment of ljarah Receivables
■   The basis  for the  permissibility  of obtaining  guarantees  for payment is that this is not contrary to the purpose  of an ljarah contract. Rather guarantees  are relevant to credit transactions because they secure per• formance.
The basis for the permissibility  of a payment  acceleration  clause is  the
saying of the Prophet  (peace   be upon him):  "Muslims are bound  by the conditions  they made, and because payment  on a deferred  basis is  the right of the lessee  (the  debtor  as to rentals),  and the lessee  may,  based

(18)  Fatwa of the Unified Sharf'ah  Board  of Al Baraka No.  (1/97). (I9)  Fatwa of the Unified  Sharf'ah  Board  of Al Baraka No (9/9).



261





Shari'ah Standard No.  (9):  larah  and Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek

on agreement,  choose to pay before time and relinquish  the deferral of the date of payment  entirely.  The lessee  may also agree to a stipulation that bases acceleration  of payment  on the event of default in payment.
• The basis of the prohibition  of increasing the amount of lease receivables
in exchange for a deferral of payment is because this is a form of Riha. The  basis  for  the  permissibility  of stipulating  that  a solvent  debtor should undertake  to make a payment to charity in case of default is that this is  similar to an undertaking to make a donation  that is approved by the Maliki  scholars,  notably  Abdullah  Ibn Nati'  and Muhammad Ibn Ibrahim  Ibn Dinar.o»
Changes  to the Ijarah Contract
■  The basis for allowing the lessor to sell the leased asset to a third party without the consent of the lessee  is  that the lessor  owns the asset and is acting within  the limits of his ownership without  affecting the right of the lessee  that is  materialised  in the usufruct.  If the ljarah expires,  enabling the buyer to take  possession  of the  asset is  sufficient to discharge  the seller from any responsibility  as to delivery in which case the buyer will own the asset excluding the right of the lessee to the usufruct  which is attached to the asset even if the ownership  is  transf zrred. The Shari'ah Supervisory  Board  of Al Rajhi Banking  and Investment  Corp., and the Shari'ah  Supervisory  Board of the Jordan  Islamic  Bank have  issued a resolution  in support  of this ruling.
The basis for the termination  of the lease  contract due to a total destruc• tion of the leased  asset is  that the rent is  in consideration  of the benefit of the leased  asset  and if the latter  is  destroyed,  there is  no justification for the payment of the rental.
■  The basis for the  entitlement  of the lessor  to the  rentals even  though
the lessee returns  the leased asset to the owner or stops using it is  that ljarah  is  a binding  contract  that cannot  be terminated   unilaterally  by the lessee.

(20)  International Islamic  Fiqh Academy Resolution No.  13 (1/3).
(21)  See: AI-Hattab,  "Tahrir Al-Kalam F Masa 'il Al-IItizam" (pp. 170). This view appeared in the Fatwas of Kuwait Finance  House.
(22)  Resolution  of the Shari'ah  Board of AI  Rahi Banking and Investment Corp. No.  (11).



262





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (9):  ljarah  and Ijarah  Muntahia  Bittamleek

The basis for  the permissibility of terminating the lease contract in case of intervening  contingencies  or force majeure is  that there is a pressing need which calls for this.  This is because if the contract were to be bin•
ding in spite of such contingencies,  then  a person  with a valid excuse may incur loss that was not a result of a contract. The Shari'ah Super• visory Board  of the Kuwait Finance House and  the unified  Shari'ah
Supervisory  Board of Al Baraka"  have issued  a supporting  Fatwa  in this regard.
+  The  basis for  the permissibility  that  the lessor  may stipulate  that  an
ljarah contract be terminated  due to non-payment  of rental by the lessee is that contractual  stipulations are primarily valid and enforceable. 'This stipulation does not legalise impermissible acts or invalidate permissible acts.  Therefore, the permissibility  of this stipulation  comes under  the prophetic  Hadith  stating:  Muslims  are  bound by  the  conditions  they made  except  a condition   that  legalises impermissible   act  or  invalidates permissible act",9
■  The basis of the rule that  ljarah  does not terminate  with the death ct either party thereto is  that the subject-matter  of the contract is  the asset and as long as the asset is available the ljarah contract remains unaffected. The basis for  the right  of the lessee's heirs to terminate  the ljarah if they can prove that the contract has become too onerous for their  resources  is to avoid inflicting damage on the heirs.  This exceptional ruling is taken
from the Mali.lei  School  of law since  it  serves the interests of the lessee.
The heirs of the lessor may not terminate  the ljarah in the event of the death of the lessor  because there is  no potential damage to them,  as they will receive the rentals for  the remainder  of  the term of the contract.
Transfer  of  the  Ownership  in the  Leased  Asset  in Ijarah  Muntahia
Bittamleek
The  basis  of the  rule  that  the  documents  of the  lessor's  promise  to sell  and the methods  of transfer  of ownership  be separated  from  the ljarah  contract  is to ensure  that the obligations  and  liabilities are not

(23)  Fatwas of the Sharl'ah  Board af Jordan  Islamic Bank  No. (18). (24)  Fatwa No.  (233)  and (253).
(25)  Fatwa No  (9/9)  of the Unified Shari'ah  Board.



263





Shari'ah Standard No.  (9):  ljarah  and Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek

linked  to  each  other.  The  International  Islamic  Fiqh  Academy  has issued a resolution  in this regard9
The  basis  for  the  rule  that  the promise  of a client  to  take  an  asset
acquired by the Institution  on lease is binding is that the Institution  has acquired the asset  in order to lease it to the client due to the promise. Therefore, the rule that the promise to take the asset on lease is binding will protect the promisee.
+  The basis for  not allowing bilateral promises  is  that  the resemblance
of these promises to a contract, i.e. a contract  is  effected before taking ownership  of the  subject  matter  of the  contract.  The  International Islamic Fiqh Academy has issued  a resolution  in this  regard.D
The basis for the permissibility  of a gift contingent  upon  the expiry of
the ljarah  term  is  that  a conditional  gift is  valid.  The  Prophet  (peace be upon him)  sent a gift to Negus (the  former emperor of Ethiopia)  on condition that he was alive at the time of the arrival of the messenger.( The basis  for the permissibility of leasing an asset to the  person  from whom it is purchased by way of Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek on condition that the parties  observe the lapse of a period of time is  that this prevents the  contract  from becoming  a 'Inah  transaction.  This  is   because the
physical changes to the asset or changes in the value of the asset during this period give it the economic characteristics of a different asset.
The basis for the requirement  that all the rules prescribed for an ordinary
lease are applicable to ljarah Muntahia  Bittamleek is  that a mere promise to transfer ownership does exclude the contract from becoming an ljarah contract  or from  the  applicable  rules.  This  requirement  is  necessary in order  to prevent a linking  of contracts  (the  sale  contract  and lease

(26)  This Hadith has been related by a number of companions. It was also related  by Ahmad in his Sunan" [1:  312]; Ibn  Majah in his  "Sunan" through a good chain of transmission [2:  783],  Mustafa AI-Babi Al-Halabi  edition,  Cairo, 1372  A.H./1952  A.D;  AI-Hakim in  Mustarak",  Edition of  Hyderabad, India,  1355  A.H;  A!Bayhaqi  in  his  Sunan"
(6:  70  and 156]  and [I:  133],  Edition af  Hyderabad,  India,  1355H;  and A!-Daraqutni
in his  "Sunan"  [4:  228]  and [3:  77],  Dar AI-Mahasin LilTiba'ah edition,  Cairo, 1372
A.H./1952 A.D.
(27)  Intenatioanl  Islamic fiqh  Academy  Resolution  No.  13  (1/3).
(28)  The Hadith has been related  by  bn  Hibban:   Sahih  Ibn  Hibban"   [1:  516];  and
Ahmad in his  Musnad [6:  404].



264





Shari' ah Standard  No  (9):  larah  and Ijarah  Muntahia  Bittamleek

contract). The International Islamic Fiqh Academy has issued a resolution
in support of this ruling."
The basis for  the  rule  that  ownership  cannot  be made  in  contingent on a future date is that a sale contract  cannot  be dependent  on a future date,  as the  term  'sale' means  that  its  effiect  ( transfer  of ownership) immediately  takes place.
■  The basis for allowing recourse to the prevailing market  rate ct rental
when the transfer of ownership  becomes impossible without  any cause attributable  to the lessee is  to protect  the lessee against any loss as the lessee has paid more than the prevailing rate ct rental in order to acquire title to the asset. If this acquisition  ct title becomes impossible,  then the rental must be adjusted retrospectively to the prevailing market rate.  This ruling  is  analogous to the principle  that the price must  be discounted when a sold  crop has suffered  damages due natural calamities.































(29)  See  Note (25).



265





Shani'ah Standard No (9):  larah  and Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek





Appendix (C)
Definitions


ljarah

The  term  ljarah  as used  in this  standard   means  leasing  of property pursuant to a contract  under  which a specified permissible  benefit  in the form of a usufruct is obtained  for a specified period in return for a specified permissible  consideration.
ljarah  Muntahia Bittamleek
One of the forms of ljarah used by Islamic financial Institutions is  ljarah Muntahia  Bittamleek.   This   is  a form  of leasing  contract  which  includes a promise by the lessor to transfer the ownership in the leased property to the lessee, either at the end of the term of the ljarah  period or by stages  during the term of the contract, such transf r of the ownership  being executed through one of the means specified in the Standard.


























266

























Shari'ah Standard No.  (10)



Salam and Parallel Salam


(Revised Standard)












Contents


Subject                                                                                            Page
Pref: ilce...................................................................................................     271
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        272

I.  Scope  of the Standard  ..........sos.so.so.so.so.oso.sos.o.so.sos.so......        272

}  Contract of Salam........s.sos.ssssssss.sos.ass.sos.ssssssssssssss..sos.sos.sos...ass.,        37}
3.  Subject  Matter of Salam...........................................................................       273
4.  Changes to al-Muslatn  Fihi.....................................................................         276
5,  Delivery of  al-Muslam Fihi ..........s.ass. sos» sos.s.s as s.sos.s os» s o. s o .s.sos ...                     276
6.  Parallel Salatn............................................................................................         278
7.  Salam  Sukuk  Issues..................................................................................          279
8.  Date of Issuance of the Standard.......................................................       279
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        280
Appendices
Appendix (a):   Brief History  of the Preparation  of the Standard..............          281
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard.....................................         284
Appendix (c):   Definitions..............................................................................       289





















269








IN  THE NAME OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all  the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all  his companions





Preface


The aim of the standard  is  to explain the rules for and limitations  of Salam and Parallel Salam in respect to concluding  a Salam contract, the subject matter of Salam  and changes to the contract,  whether in the event cf ability to  deliver or otherwise.  The standard  also explains rulings  in respect to issuing Salam Sukuk.



































271





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salam





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This  standard   covers  Salam  and  Parallel  Salam  transactions,  whether the Institution is  the buyer  or the seller, and  issuing Salam Sukuk.  This standard   does  not  cover  lstisna'a  (manufacturing  or supplier  contract) because the latter  is  covered by a separate standard.

2. Contract  of Salam

2/1   General  framework for Salam  contracts

2/1/1  It is  permissible to initiate through  negotiations several Salam contracts  (with different  parties). Each operation  will end at its due date.  It is  also permissible  to draw up a general framework or a master  agreement   that  consists  of an understanding to conclude  successive  Salam  contracts,  each ct which  will take
place at an appropriate time. In this latter case, the transaction involved shall be concluded  on the basis of a memorandum of understanding in which the contracting parties  determine the framework  of the  contract  and the intention  of the   parties  to buy and sell. The parties  shall also determine the quantity  and specifications of the goods,  the  manner  af their  delivery,  the basis for determining the price,  and the manner  of payment. The  types of guarantees  and other  prospective  arrangements shall  also  be specified  in  the  memorandum.  The  execution of each Salam  contract  may then  take place separately  at the appropriate date.

2/1/2 If the  Salam  contract  is  concluded   on  the  basis of what  was initially  agreed  in  the  memorandum  of understanding,  the contents  of the  memorandum become  part and  parcel  of the contract.  This will hold. true unless the parties agreed when the



272





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (10):  Salam and Parallel Salm

contract was concluded  to exempt themselves  from some of the obligations  referred  to in the memorandum of understanding.

2/2 Form of a Salam contract

A contract  of Salam  may be concluded using the word Salam,  or Salaf, or sale,  or any term that indicates  sale of a prescribed  commodity for deferred delivery in exchange for immediate  payment  of the price.

3. Subject Matter of Salam

3/1  Capital of Salam contract and its conditions

3/1/1 It is  permissible for the  capital  of Salam  to be in the form  of fungible  goods  (such  as wheat  and  other  cereals)   in  which case  the  parties   must  make  sure  that  they  do  not  fall  into Riha. The capital may also be items of: material  value (such as livestock).  It is  also permissible  for it to be in the form  of the general  usufruct of a particular asset,  such as living in a house or having  the use of an aircraft  or a ship for  a certain period. In such a case, when  a party  is  granted  access to the usufruct through   delivery  of the  asset,  this  is  regarded   as  immediate receipt (possession)  of the Salam capital.

3/1/2  The capital af Salam should  be made known  to the two parties in a manner  that  removes  all uncertainty and  eliminates   the possibility of dispute.  In principle,  the capital of Salam should be in the form rf cash.  In this case, the currency of payment, the
amount  and the  manner  of  payment  shall  be clearly  defined.
If the capital  of  Salam is  in the form  of fungibles,    then  the kind,  type, specifications and quantity of these shall be clearly defined.
3/1/3  The capital in a Salam contract  must be paid immediately  at the place where the contract  is concluded. However, as an exception to this  ruling, payment  may be delayed for two or three  days at

(I) Fungi bles are goods that share common features such that they do not differ significantly.
Any fungibles can be replaced by any other in the event of destruction, without need to
assess the value of the item destroyed or the one replacing  it.



273





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salm

most. Even if such a short delay has been stipulated  earlier, this will not  affect  the Salam  contract provided  that  the  period  of delay is  not equal to or greater than the delivery period  for al Muslam Fihi.

3/1/4 It is  not permitted that  a debt  be recognised as the capital  of Salam,  such  as using  as the  capital of Salam  loans  or debts owed  by the  seller  to  the  Institution  as a result  of previous transactions.

3/2 Al-Muslam FHhi and its conditions

3/2/1  Salam  contracts are permitted  for  fungible  goods,  like those that  may  be  weighed,  measured   or  counted,  the  articles  ct which  do  not  differ  in any significant  manner,  provided  that
no Riba ensues.

3/2/2 Among  the  items  for which  variations  in numbers   make  no difference  are  the  products  of companies   that  manufacture goods  in approximate units that  are identified  by trademarks, standardised  specifications and  are regularly  and  commonly available at any time.  However,  this rule must be read together with item  3/2/8.

3/2/3  Salam is not permitted for anything  specific like "this car. Nor is  it permitted for  anything   fer- which  the  seller  may  not  be held  responsible,  like  land, buildings  or trees;  or for  articles whose  values  change  according  to subjective  assessment,  like jewellery  and  antiques.  Also, it is not  permissible to stipulate that  al-Muslam   Fihi  must  be from  a specific  piece  of land. However, on the delivery date the seller may present  the buyer with whatever  items are available (and meet the contract specifications), irrespective of whether  such items are from his own fields or factories  or elsewhere.

3/2/4 It is  not  permissible   for al-Muslam  Fihi to  be an amount  of currency,  gold or silver,  if the capital of the Salam contract  was paid in the form of currency,  gold or silver.



274





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salam

3/2/5  Al-Muslam    Fihi   must   be the   kind   of  article   for   which a specification   may  be  drawn  up  so that  the  seller may  be held responsible  for its conformity to the specification.  It will be sufficient if the specification  is explained  in a manner  that removes  uncertainty,  except for minor  discrepancies that are customarily  ignored, considered   acceptable,  and  not  usually regarded  as grounds  for dispute.

3/2/6  It is a requirement that al-Muslam  Fihi be clearly known to the contracting parties  in a manner  that eliminates  any possibility of uncertainty   or  ambiguity.  The  reference  for determining descriptions  that  are used to specify and  identify  al-Muslam Fihi  is  customary  practice and the experience  of experts.

3/2/7 It is a requirement that the parties know the quantity of al-Mus• lam  Fihi.  The quantity of each item  is  determined  according to its condition  and nature  with regard to weight,  measurement, volume and number.
3/2/8  I is a requirement  that al-Muslam Fihi  be commonly  available under normal  circumstances  at the place where it should be on the delivery date,  so that the commodity  will be accessible  to the seller in order to discharge his obligation by delivering it to the buyer.

3/2/9  It is  a requirement  that  the  date  of delivery  for  al-Muslam Fihi be known  in a manner  that eliminates any uncertainty or ambiguity  which may lead to a dispute. There  is  no Shari'ah objection  to the  contracting  parties  setting  various  dates  on which the delivery of al-Muslam  Fihi may take place, in instalments,  provided  the  capital  of Salam  was paid  at the time the contract  was originally  concluded.

3/2/10  In principle,  the parties  may designate  the  place at which  al• Muslam  Fihi is  to be delivered.  If the  parties  to the  contract do not determine  the place of delivery,  then the place at which the  contract  was concluded  will be regarded  as the place  of delivery unless it  turns  out to be impossible  to make delivery



275





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salm

to such  a place.  In that  case,  the  place  of delivery  should  be
determined according  to customary practice.

3/3  Security for al-Muslam  Fihi

Al-Muslam  Fihi  may be secured by a mortgagee or a guarantee  or any
other permissible  means of securing  payment.

4. Changes to al-Muslam  Fihi

4/1   Selling  al-Muslam Fihi before  taking  possession

It is not permitted for the buyer to sell al-Muslam  Fihi  before taking possession  of it.

4/2  Replacement of al-Muslam Fihi

It is  permissible  for the buyer to exchange al-Muslam  Fihi  for other goods, except currency, after the delivery date falls due, as long as such a substitution  was not  stipulated  in the  contract.  This  rule  applies whether  or  not  the substitute  is  similar  in kind to al-Muslam  Fihi. This  is  provided  that  the substitute  is   suitable  for  being  exchanged as al-Muslam  Fihi  for the capital of the Salam  contract,  and that the market  value of the substitute  should  not be greater than  the market value of al-Muslam  Fihi at the time of delivery.
4/3 Cancellation  (lqalah) of a Salam contract

It is permissible, when both  parties  agree, to cancel the entire  Salam contract  in return  for repayment  in full of the amount  of the capital of Salam.  Partial cancellation,  that  is,  cancellation of the delivery  of part  of al-Muslam  Fihi, in return for repayment of a corresponding part  of the capital of Salam,  is also permissible.
5. Delivery of  al-Muslam Fihi

5/1  The  seller  is  under  an obligation  to  deliver  al-Muslam   Fihi to  the buyer on the due date in accordance  with  the terms  cf the contract, such as agreed  specifications  and  quantity.  The  buyer, on the other hand, must accept the goods if they meet the specifications explained
in the contract.  If the buyer refuses to accept al-Muslam  Fihi, he shall
be compelled  to do so.



276





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salm

5/2  If the seller offers delivered goods of a quality that is  superior  to that required  by  the  contractual   specifications,  the  buyer  must  accept the goods,  provided  that  the seller shall not seek a higher  price for the better  quality.  This may be considered  one of the ways in which a contract  is  ethically  fulfilled.  However, this  will apply only  if the (inferior)  description  specified  in the  contract  is  not  itself deemed vital.

5/3  If the quality of the delivered goods is inferior to that required by the contractual specifications, the buyer is  entitled  either to reject or to accept the goods in that condition. If he accepts the goods, his  action is  considered  as ethical acceptance. It is  also permissible  for the two parties to agree to a settlement  on terms for acceptance  cf the goods even at a discounted  price.

5/4 It is not permitted  for a seller to deliver al-Muslam Fihi in the form of a commodity  different  from the one agreed upon  if the commodity is  considered  to belong to the  same genus as al-Muslarn  Fihi (e.g., al-Muslam  Fihi is  corn  and  the commodity  that the seller wants to deliver  is  wheat).  However,  the  delivery  of al-Muslarn  Fihi  in the form of a different  type  of commodity  from  that agreed  upon  may take place only on the basis of the conditions  for the replacement  of al-Muslam  Fihi  by other goods.  [sze  item 4/2]
5/5  Delivery of al-Muslam  Fihi may take  place befor?  the due date, on condition  that  the goods  conform  to the agreed  specifications and quantities.  If the  buyer  has a valid  reason  for rejecting  the goods, then  he will not be compelled  to accept them.  Otherwise, the buyer will be forced to accept the goods.

5/6 If the seller fails to perform  his obligation, owing to insolvency, he should  be granted  an extension  of time for delivery.

5/7  h is not permitted to stipulate  a penalty  clause in  respect of delay in the delivery of al-Muslam  Fihi.

5/8  ht case all or part of al-Muslam  Fihi is not available to the seller on
the due date,  the buyer shall have the following options:



277





Sharf'ah  Standar d No  (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salm

5/8/1  To wait  until al-Muslam FHhi  is  available.

5/8/2  'Tb cancel  the contract  and recover the paid  capital.

It is also permissible  for the parties to agree to replacement  of
al-Muslam  hi  by other goods.  [see  item  4/2]

6. Parallel Salam

6/1  It is permissible  for the seller to enter  into a separate, independent Salam  contract with a third party in order to acquire goods of a similar specification to those specified in the first Salam contract, so that the first  Salam  obligation will be  discharged  by  delivering these goods. Hence, the seller in the first Salam contract becomes the buyer in the second Salam  contract.

6/2  It is  permissible  for the buyer to conclude  a separate parallel Salam with a third  party  for the purpose  cf selling,  en the basis  cf Salam, a commodity  whose  description  corresponds  lo the description  of the commodity  to be acquired  through  the first Salam  contract.  In this  situation,  the  buyer  in  the  first  Salam  contract  becomes  the seller in the second Salam contract.

6/3  In both the two  situations mentioned  in items 6/l and 6/2, it is not permissible  for  the  parties  to  link the  obligations  under  the  two Salam  contracts  together  so that  the  execution  of the  obligations of one contract  is  contingent  on the  outcome  of the  other.  Hence, it is   necessary  that  both  the  obligations  and  the rights  under  the two  contracts  stand  alone  in all  respects.  Therefore,  if one  party breaches  his  obligation  under  the  first  Salam  contract,  the  other party (the injured  party)  has no right  to relate this damage or loss  to the party with whom  he concluded  a Parallel  Salam.  Consequently. he has no right  on the basis  of his  loss  or damage  under  the first Salam  contract  to terminate  the second  Salam  contract or to delay in  performing  it.
6/4 All the rules cf Salam  as  explained in items  1-5  above are applicable to Parallel Salam  as well.



278





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salm

7. Salam  Sukuk  Issues

It is  not permitted to issue tradable  Sukuk based on the debt from a Salam contract. [see  item  (4/1)]
8. Date  of Issuance of the Standard

This Sharf'ah Standard was issued on 29 Safar  1422 A.H., corresponding
to 23 May 2001  A.D.














































279





Sharf'ah  Standar d Na (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salam





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah  Standard  on Salam  and Parallel  Salam  was adopted  by the Shari'ah Board in its meeting No  (6)  held on 25-29 Safar 1422 A.H., corresponding  to 19-23 May 200I A.D.

In its meeting No.  (8)  held in Mecca on 28 Safar  - 4 Rabi'.  I  1423  A.H., corresponding  to  11-16  May 2002 A.D.,  the  Shari'ah  Board  readopted a resolution to reformat the Shari'ah Rules for Salam and Parallel  Salam in the form of a Shari'ah Standard.






































280





Sharr'ah  Standar d No  (10):  Salam and Parallel  Salam





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its  meeting No.  (5) held  in Makkah Al-Mukarramah  on 8-12  Ramadan
1421  A.H.,  corresponding to 4-8 December 2001  A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Board decided to give priority to the preparation of the a Shari'ah  rules for  Salam and Parallel  Salam.

On  Monday  11   Shawwal   1420  A.H., corresponding  to  17  January  2000
A.D.,  the Fatwa  am Arbitration Committee decided  to commission  a Sharf'ah
consultant to prepare a juristic  study and an exposure  draft on the Shari'ah
Rules for Salam  and Parallel  Salam.

In its  meeting  held  in Bahrain  on 21-23  Muharram   1421  A.H.,  corre•
sponding  to 26-28 April 2000 A.D., the Fatwa and Arbitration  Committee discussed  the  exposure  draft of the  Shari'ah  rules for Salam and Parallel Salam  and  asked  the  consultant  to make the  amendments   in light of the comments  made by the members.

In its  meeting No.  (4) held  in Abu Dhabi,  United Arab Emirates, on  14
Sha'ban  1421  A.H., corresponding  to  10 November  2000 A.D., the Fatwa and Arbitration Committee discussed the  exposure  draft and made some relevant amendments.
The  revised  exposure  draft  ct the Shari'ah rules was presented  to the Shari'ah   Board  in  its  meeting  No.   (5)  held  in  Makkah  Al-Mukarramah on 8-12  Ramadan  1421  A.H.,  corresponding  to 4-8 December  2000 A.D. The  Shari'ah  Board  made  further  amendments  to  the  exposure  draft  of the  standard  and  decided  that  it should  be  distributed  to specialists  and interested  parties  in order  to obtain  their  comments  to  discuss them  in a public hearing.



281





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salm

A public  hearing  was held  in Bahrain  on 4-5  Dhul-Hajjah   142l  A.H., corresponding to 27-28 February  2001  A.D.  The public hearing  was attend• ed by  more  than  30  participants  representing central  banks,  institutions, accounting  firms, Shari'.ah scholars, academics  and others  interested in this field. Members of the Shari'ah Studies Committee  responded to  the written comments  that  were sent prior  to the public hearing  as well as to the oral comments that were expressed in the public hearing.

The Fatwa and Arbitration Committee  held its meeting No. (5) in Bahrain on  15  Dhul-Hajjah   1421  A.H.,  corresponding  to  10 March  2001  A.D.,  to discuss the comments  made about the exposure  draft  The committee  made the necessary amendments in light ct both  the written  comments  that were received and oral comments  that took place in the public hearing.

The Shari'ah Board in its  meeting  No.  (6)  held in Al-Madinah  Al-Mun• awwarah on 25-29 Safar 1422 A.H., corresponding to 19-23 May 2001  A.D., discussed  the amendments made by the Fatwa and Arbitration  Committee, and made the necessary amendments. The standard  was adopted in the name of Shari'ah rules for Salam and Parallel Salam. Some paragraphs  were adopted
by the unanimous  vote of the members of the Shari'ah  Board while the other
paragraphs  were adopted  by the majority vote ct the members, as recorded in the minutes of the Shari'ah  Board.

The  Shari'ah  Board decided  in its  meeting  No.  (7)  held  in Makkah Al• Muk.arramah on 9-13  Ramadan  1422  A.H,  corresponding 24-28 November
2001A.D., to reformat all Shari'ah rules in a form of standards and a committee was formed for this purpose.
In its  meeting  No.  (8) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah on 28 Safar
- 4 Rab'  I,  1423  A.H.,  corresponding to 11-16  May 2002 A.D.,, the Sharf'ah Board adopted  the reformatted version  of the Sharf'ah  rules for Investment and Financing  No. (3) on Salam and Parallel Salam with the title of Shari'ah Standard  No.   (9)  on  Salam  and  Parallel  Salam,  without   any  substantial
changes  in the content.

The Shari'ah Standards Review Committee reviewed  the standard  in its meeting  held  in Rabi' II,   1433  A.H.,  corresponding to  March  2012  A.D.,



282





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salm

in the State of Qatar,  and proposed after deliberation a set of amendments (additions,  deletions,  and  rephrasing)  as deemed  necessary, and  then submitted the proposed amendments to the Sharf'ah Board for approval as it deemed necessary.

In its  meeting  No.  (39) held  in the  Kingdom  of Bahrain  on  13-15
Muharram   1435 A.H.,  corresponding  to  6-8 November  2014 A.D, the Shari'ah  Board discussed  the proposed  amendments   submitted  by  the Shari'ah  Standards  Review Committee.  After deliberation,  the Sharfah Board approved necessary amendments, and the standard was adopted in its current amended version.









































283





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salam





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Permissibility  of Salam
A contract of  Salam  derives  its  permissibility  from  the  Qur 'an,  the Sunnah  and Ijma'  (consensus  of Fuqaha).  On the level of the  Qur'an, Allah, the Almighty, says: {O ye who believe! When you deal with each other,  in transactions involvingfuture  obligations in afixed period time, reduce them to writing}.  Ibn Abbas said:  "I declare that a Salaf (Salam) contract  in which the commodity  is  guaranteed  for future delivery has been permitted  by Allah" and then he read:  {"O ye  who believe! When you deal with each  other,  in transactions  involving future  obligations in  a fixed  period  time,  reduce  them  to  writing"}.  I is  reported  that Ibn Abbas said: "This verse is  a revelation for the particular  purpose  of making Salam permissible.0

On  the  level  of Sunnah,  Ibn Abbas  is reported  to  have said:  "The Prophet (peace  be upon  him)  has came  to Medina  and fund  that people were selling dates for deferred delivery after a duration  of one or two years on  a Salam   basis.  The  Prophet  (peace  be upon  him) said: 'Whoever  pays
for dates  on a deferred  delivery  basis (Salam)  should  do so on  the  basis  of
a specified scale and  weight".  In another  text of the Hadith the Prophet (peace  be upon  him)  said:  "Whoever pays  on  a deferred   delivery basis should  do so on the basis of a specified scale,  weight and date of delivery".

The scholars are unanimous on the permissibility cf a Salam contract. Ibn
Mundhir said that the scholars agreed that a Salam  contract -ie, a contract

(2)  [AI-Baqarah  (The Cow):  282].
(3)  See:  Ibn  Al-Jawzi,  "Zad AI-Masir F 'Im  Al-Tafsir" [1:  336]  and Ibn  Kathir,  "Tafsir Al•
Qur 'an Al-Azim" [1:  496].
(4)  The Hadith has been related by A!-Bukhari,  Muslim and others.   See:  "Sahih   Al•
Bukhari" [2:  781],  Damascus:  Dar Al-Qalam edition;  and "Sahih Muslim"  [3:   1226],
Beirut:  Dar AL-Fikr  edition.



284





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salm

in which a person sells to his fellow  man a specific and determined  thing by
weight  or measure for a future defined date of delivery-is permissible.

Wisdom  of Making Salam Permissible

The  wisdom  of making  Salam  permissible  lies in the  fact that  Salam facilitates a type cf financing  for people in need of it.  In particular,  farmers, market  gardeners  and merchants, among  others, need working capital for their  businesses  and  for their  living expenses  in order  to operate. Hence, Salam  is  made  permissible  so that  these  businesses  may benefit  from  it. The  buyer  may benefit  from  its  permissibility   as well,  by  acquiring the commodity  at a price  below the market price.
Similarly,  a contract of Salam  responds  to the needs ct a large  number of business enterprises  at different levels,  ranging from small and medium• sized enterprises   to  conglomerates   that  are  involved  in  agricultural   and industrial  production   or trade  and the like.  In order  for  these businesses to be  productive,  they need working  capital  in the form  cf either  cash or assets.  Hence,  Salam  has provided  an investment  opportunity in the form of financing  of the working capital for trade. It also covers the demands  of those  in need of liquidity, as long as they are able to fulfill the orders  they receive in return  at the due date.

Although  the contract  of Salam is  commonly  used by agricultural busi• nesses,  its permissibility is not,  however,  confined to these fields.  It can also be used in other investment  opportunities,  such as industry  or trade.

The contract of Salam also meets immediate  needs for liquidity, This is because it  gives the seller flexibility in using the sale proceeds  (before the commodity is  delivered), and  the opportunity to arrange  for the counter• value (al-Muslam  Fihi) and its delivery to the buyer at the date of delivery,

Subject  Matter of a Salam  Contract
• The  basis for  the  permissibility  of presenting   usufruct  as  capital  in a Salam  contract  is  the view of the Maliki scholars.  This is  regarded as immediate  receipt of the capital based on the Shari'ah  maxim that says:

(5)  Ibn  Al-Mundhir,  4lIjmd" (P.  54)  and Ibn Qudamah;  AI-Maughnf"  [6:  385],  Cairo:
Matba'at Hajar edition.



285





Sharf'ah  Standar d Na (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salam

"Taking possession  of part  of a thing  is  like taking possession  of the whole thing"° Hence, this is not a sale of debt (because the buyer has received control  over the usufruct).0
■  The basis for the requirement  that the capital of Salam  must be known
to the two parties is that a Salam contract is one of the exchange contracts in  which  the  consideration   need  to  be known so as  to remove  any uncertainty."
The  basis  for  the  requirement  that  the  capital  must  be  paid  at  the conclusion  of a Salam contract  is  the saying of the Prophet  (peace be upon him):  "Whoever pays on a deferred delivery basis should do so on the  basis  of specifying  the scale."  'The  Tasdf or Islaf means  payment in advance.  Salam was so named  because  the capital  must  be paid in advance.  If payment  is delayed,  the transaction is  not called Salam.' Again,  any delay in payment  of the capital and dispersal  of the parties renders  the transaction a sale of debt for debt! which  is  prohibited,
and  the  scholars  agreed  on  its  prohibition.  Ibn  Rushd  said:  "As for
sale of debt  for debt,  Muslim  scholars  are  unanimous  regarding  its
prohibition?\?
The basis for it not being permitted that a debt be capital in Salam is because this would  render  the transaction   a form  of sale of debt and this is  prohibited  by the Shari'ah.
The basis for  the impermissibility  of Salam  where the subject matter is a specific and identified  thing  is  the Hadith  stating that  "A man  came

(6)  AI-Dardir,  Al-Sharh AI-Saghir" [4:  347].
(7)  AI-Buhuti,  Sharh Muntaha Al-Iradat" [2:  37].
(8) AI-Qadi  Abdul-Wahhab,  "AI-Ma'unah" [2:  987]  Ibn Juzay,  Al-Qawanin Al-Fiqhiyyah"
(P  202);  AI-Kasani,  Bada ' AL-Sanar" [5:  301];  Ibn Qudamah,  41-Maughni [6: 411];
and A!-Shirazi, Al-Muhadhdhab [1:  300].
(9)  The Hadith  has been related  by  Al-Bukhari,  Muslim and others:  "Sahih Al-Bukhari"
[2:  781],  Damascus:  Dar AI-Qalam edition; and "Sahih Muslim" [3:  1226],  Beirut:  Dar
Al-Fikr edition.
(I0)  Ibn Qudamah, 4l-Mughn",  [6: 408]
(11) See:  Al-Kasani,  "Bada r AI-Sana 'r [5:  202]  Ibn  Rushd  (the  grandson)  "Bidayat Al•
Mujtahid Wa Nihayat Al-Muqtasid" [2:  205],  Beirut, Dar Al-Qalam edition; Al-Qadi
Abdul-Wahhab,   "A!Ma'unah  [2:  988] and A!-Zayla'i,  "Tabyin  Al-Haqa'iq  Sharh
Kanz Al-Daqa'iq"  [4:  1I7].
(12)   bn  Rushd, "Bidayat AI-Mujtahid" [2:  150].



286





Sharf'ah  Standard  No (10):  Salam and Parallel Salam

to the  Prophet   (peace  be upon  him)  and said;  'The  kin  of so and so from the Jews had  embraced  Islam.  However,  they are hungry and I am afraid they may become apostates'.  The Prophet  (peace  be upon him) asked the people around  him;  'Who  has something  (money)?' One  Jew said;  'I have
so  and so (he mentioned   a sum  of money),  may be he  said;  'I have three
hundred dinars and I will pay such and such price for  the products  of the farm of the kin of so and so'. The Prophet  (peace  be upon him) said:  '(buy)
With  such  and such price  to be delivered  after such  and such period,  but not for  the products  of the kin of so and so"\  Again,  ifa Salam  contract
is  concluded  for providing  products  from a specific farm, there might not be products  from this  farm at the time of: delivery,  and this  leads  to Gharar  (uncertainty).
■   The basis for the requirement  that the subject-matter of Salam be com• monly available under  normal  circumstances where it is  required  is  to remove uncertainty and to ensure that the seller will be able to deliver it at the date of: delivery.
Changes  to a Salam Contract
■   The basis for the impermissibility  of selling the subject-matter of Salam before taking possession of it is because such an action is  a form of sale of debts which  is  not permissible.
■   The basis for the impermissibility  of substituting  the subject-matter  of Salam with a commodity, the price of which is higher than the prevalent market value of the subject-matter  ct: Salam at the date of delivery is  to deter the buyer from malting a compound  profit on one deal.
■  The  basis  for  the  permissibility  of the  termination  of a  Salam   by
agreement   (Iqalah)  is  because  the  Prophet  (peace be upon  him)  has encouraged  Iqalah  in  general  and  Salam  is  not  an  exception   from this concession.  Salam is  also a form  of sale and since sale contracts admit  Iqalah,  so  too does a Salam  contract. Again, Iqalah  is actually

(13)  The Hadith  has been related  by Ibn  Majah and Abu Dawud.  See  Sunan Ibn Majah" (2:  765-766];  and  Sunan  Abu Dawud"  [3:  744].  Al-Shawkani  said: "There  is an unknown narrator in the chain of transmission  of this Hadith.  This is because Abu Dawud narrated it  through Muhammad  Ibn  Kathie  from Sufyan from Abu  Ishaq from a Najrani man from Ibn  Umar. Therefore, the Hadith  is not of a strong authority. See:  "Nay] Al-Awtar"  [5:  345-346].



287





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salm

permitted  for the sale of tangible goods  in consideration  of the need of contracting parties  to be  able to  deal with  regret  and  a desire  to withdraw  from  the contract.  In the case of Salam, the possibility  that the parties  may regret  concluding  the transactions is greater  than  in the sale of tangible goods because Salam  is a low cost form of sale for which permissibility  of Iqalah  is  easily applicable  in Salam.(9
Delivery  of al-Muslam  Fihi

The basis for not allowing penalty clauses in Salam  is because al-Muslam Fihi  is considered to be a debt;  and it is  not permitted  to stipulate payment in excess of the principal amount of debts.

Parallel Salam
• The basis for the permissibility  of Parallel  Salam  is  that  it represents two  Salam deals  that  are separable  from  each other  despite  the fact that  the  descriptions  of the  subject-matter  in the  two  contracts   are similar.  However,  the contract  does not lead to two sales in one, which is  impermissible.
■  The basis for the impermissibility of tradeable  Salam Sukuk is because trading with such Sukuk  is  a form of sale of debt which  is prohibited.























(14)  See:  Al-Kasani,  "Bada 'r' AI-Sana 'r" [5:  214].



288





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salm





Appendix (C)
Definitions


Salam

A Salam  transaction  is the purchase of a commodity  for deferred delivery in exchange for immediate  payment.  It  is  a type cf sale in which the price, known  as the  Salam capital,  is   paid  at  the  time  of contracting  while the delivery of the item  to be sold, known as al-Muslam Fihi  (the subject-matter cf a Salam contract), is  deferred. 'The seller  and the buyer are known  as al• Muslam  Ilaihi  and  al-Muslam  or Rab al-Salam  respectively..  Salam  is  also known  as Salaf (literally;  borrowing).

Parallel Salam

If the  seller  enters  into  another  separate  Salam  contract  with  a third party  to acquire  goods,  the  specification  cf which  corresponds   to that  cf the commodity  specified in the first Salam  contract,  so that he (the  seller) can fulfil his  obligation  under  that  contract,  then  this second  contract  is called, in contemporary custom, Parallel Salam or Salam Muwazi. The following is  an example  cf such  a contract.  An  Institution  on  one  hand buys a specified  quantity  of cotton  from  farmers  on a Salam basis and,  in turn, the buyer in the first Salam contract  enters into a new separate Salam contract  with  textile  mills  so as to  provide  them,  by means  of that  new Salam  contract,  with cotton,  the specifications  of which are similar to the specifications  of the cotton  to be acquired  under  the first Salam contract,
without  making the execution  of the second Salam contract contingent  on the execution  of the  first Salam  contract.

Iqalah

Iqalah or cancellation of a contract is  a bilateral agreement of the contract•
ing  parties to abate and remove the legal  effect of a contract.



289





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (10):  Salam  and Parallel Salam

Mithlis (Fungibles)
Items that are mutually  interchangeable,  i.e.,  items whose  units  are identical (in specifications),  and if destructed,  are guaranteed  by other  identical units without  consideration  to their value.



















































290

























Shari'ah Standard No.  (11)



Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a


(Revised Standard)












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        296

I.  Scope of the Standard ............so.sos«sos.so.sso.so.ss.sos.sos.so..o....                            296
}  Istisnaa Contract ......sssssssss.sos»ssssssssss.sos»sos·sos.sos>sos.sos»sos..so.                            296
3.  Subject-Matter of, and Guarantees in, Istisna'a..........................        298
4.  Changes to lstisna'.a Contract..................................................................        302
5.  Supervision  of the Execution of an Istisna'a Contract.....-......        304
6.  Delivery and Disposal of the Subject-Matter.....-..a-.....        305
7,  Parallel [stisnaa  ~..us«so+rue+so+rue»suss+roe»suers»mo»suers»or»roes+ore»,                 307
8.  Date of Issuance cf the Standard............................................................        308
Adoption  of the Standard......................................................................        309
Appendices
Appendix (a)   Brief History cf the Preparation of the Standard..............        310
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah   Basis for the Standard....................................         313
Appendix (c):   Definitions.............................................................................         319





















293








IN  THE NAME OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household  and all his companions





Preface


The objective of this standard is to explain the Shari'ah rulings and lim• itations applicable to Istisna'a and parallel Istisna'a transactions in respect to concluding an Istisna'a contract, the subject-matter of Istisna'a and changes to the contract. The standard also explains issues  relating to the execution of the contract and the supervision of its execution.



































295





Shan'ah  Standard  No. (11):  Istisna'a  and Parallel Istisna'a





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope  of the Standard

The standard  covers Istisna'a and parallel  Istisna'a transactions whether the Institution is  acting as an ultimate purchaser or is acting as a manufacturer or as a builder for construction.

2. Istisna'a Contract

2/1  Conclusion  of an Istisna'a contract at the time of contracting  or after the bilateral promise
2/1/1  It is  permissible that the  Institution and a customer conclude an Istisna'a contract before  the Institution  assumes title to the subject-matter to  be  sold  to  the customer or to the  materials from which the subject-matter will be produced (manufactured or constructed).

2/1/2 I is permissible for the  Institution to benefit from any price offers or quotations that the customer has obtained from other dealers or suppliers  to assist it  in the evaluation  of expenses and the computation of prospective profit.
2/1 /3  It is  not permissible that the Institution's role in the Istisna'a be that of a financial  intermediary between a buyer and a third party,  especially if the buyer has  become unable to meet his obligations  toward such  a third  party,  and this  prohibition applies  whether such   a role  would talce place  before or after the commencement of the work.  [see  item 4/2/2]

(1)  The  Arabic  term  "lstisna'a  applies  to  both manufacturing and construction,  and there is no convenient  term  in English  that  covers both manufacturers and builders. Therefore, the term "manufacturer" will be used in this standard to designate  a party acting as manufacturer   or contractor  in an Istisna'a contract,  and the term  'subject• matter' will be used to designate the goods or buildings that are the subject-matter of the contract.



296





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

2/2  Form  and  conditions of an Istisna'a contract

2/2/1 A contract  of Istisna'a  is binding  on the  contracting parties provided   that  certain  conditions   are fulfilled,  which  include specification   of the  type,  kind,  quality  and  quantity   of the subject-matter  to  be  produced.  Moreover,  the  price  of the subject-matter must  be known  and, if necessary,  the delivery date  must   be   determined.  If the   subject-matter  does  not conform  to the  specification   agreed  upon,  the  customer has the option  to accept or to refuse the subject-matter.

2/2/2  Since a contract of Istisna'a is  binding, the parties to the contract are  inevitably  bound   by   all   obligations   am   consequences flowing from  their  agreement.  In other  words, the contracting
parties  need not to renew an exchange of offer and acceptance after  the  subject-matter  is   completed.  This  is  different  from the  promise  in a contract  of Murabahah,  which  requires  the signature of a sale contract  through  a new offer and acceptance by the parties  when possession  of the items  to be sold is  taken by the Institution.

2/2/3  It  is  not  permitted for  the  manufacturer to  stipulate  in the contract  of Istisna'a that  he is  not liable for def cts.

2/2/4 It is  not  permissible  to  conclude   Istisna'a  contracts or  pro• cesses of Istisna'a  in a manner  that  makes it a legal  device for a mere interest-based financing. Examples are a transaction in which the Institution  buys items from the contractor on a cash payment   basis  and  sells them  back  to  the  manufacturer  on a def rred payment  basis at a higher  price;  or where the party ordering  the subject-matter to be produced  is the manufactur•
er himself;  or where one third  or more of the facility in which
the subject-matter will be produced belongs  to the customer. All the circumstances mentioned  above would  make the deal an interest-based  financing  deal in  which  the  subject-matter never genuinely changes hands, even if the deal is won through competitive  bidding.  This  rule  is  intended  to  avoid sale and
buy back transactions  (Bay' al-' Inah).



297





Shan'ah  Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

3. Subject-Matter of, and Guarantees in, Istisna'a

3/1  The rulings concerning al-Masn0o'

3/1/1  An Istisna'a  contract  is  permissible  only for  raw materials  that can be transformed from their natural  state by a manufacturing or  construction  process  involving  labour.  Therefore,  Istisna'a is  valid  only  in so far  as  the  supplier  has  agreed  to  provide a subject-matter that is  manufactured or constructed.

3/1/2  It is  permissible  that  a contract   of Istisna'a  be  concluded   for the production of a subject-matter having unique  descriptions according  to the requirement of the ultimate purchaser  even if such a subject-matter has no substitutes in the market, provided the  subject-matter  is  subject  to specification.  Similarly,  it  is permissible that the subject-matter of a contract of Istisna'a be items  that  have perfect  substitutes  in the  market,  and  can be substituted for one another  in fulfilling an obligation, because they share common   characteristics by virtue  of the process  of manufacture  or  construction.  This  rule  applies  whether   the items to be produced are intended for consumption or for use with their substance kept intact.

3/1/3 It is not  permissible  that  the  subject-matter  of  an  Istisna'a contract be an existing and identified capital asset.  For example, it is  invalid  for  the  Institution  to conclude  a contract to  sell a particular designated  car or factory  on the basis  of Istisna'a. This  is  because  Istisna'a  is  a sale contract  applicable to items that  are identified  by specification,  not by designation.  Unless the  items  are  completely  or partially  delivered,  the  ultimate purchaser has  no  prior  right  (in  the  event  that  the  supplier is  declared  bankrupt  or  insolvent)  over a third  party  to the items that are the subject-matter of the contract while they are still in  the process  of being  produced  and have not yet been delivered  to him.  In addition,  the  ultimate  purchaser   cannot be regarded  as the owner  of the materials  in the possession  of the  manufacturer  for  the  purpose   of producing the  subject-



298





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

matter of the contract,  unless the manufacturer has previously undertaken,  as a guarantee for the completion  of the work, that such materials  will only be used for the order  of the ultimate purchaser.

3/1/4  The  contract  of Istisna'a  may be  concluded  with  a condition that  the  production   shall be  carried  out  by  the  Institution using its  own resources,  in which case it has to abide by this condition  and has no right to assign the process of production
to another  entity.

3/1/5  It is permissible  for the manufacturer to fulfil  his obligation in an Istisna'a  contract  by using  items  produced  by his  own resources   or  items  produced  by  other  parties   that  existed before   the  contract   was  concluded.   The  latter  option   is, however,  only valid if the ultimate  purchaser  did not stipulate that the manufacturer  should use his own resources. However, this  rule  should  not  be  used  as a device  for  deferment  of consideration   (the   price  and  the  commodity)   of a sale  of a subject-matter  that  is  to  be  delivered  in the  future  based on its  specification  as given by the  seller,  but which  are not intended  to be produced.

3/1/6 The manufacturer is  under  an obligation  to produce  the sub• ject-matter  according  to specification  and  within  the  period agreed  upon  or within  such reasonable  time  as the nature  of the  work  may permit,  in  accordance  with  accepted  practice
that is  recognised  by experts.

3/1/7 The  parties  may agree on a period  during which  the  manu• facturer  will be  liable for  any def cts  or  the  maintenance  of the  subject-matter.   They  may  also  leave  the  determination of liability  relating  to defects  and maintenance   to customary practice.
3/1/8  It is permissible  to draw up an lstisna'a contract  for real estate developments on designated land owned either by the ultimate purchaser  or the contractor,  or on land in which  either of them



299





Shan'ah Standard  No. (11):  Istisa'a  and Parallel  Istisna'a

owns the usufruct.  This is  permissible  because the contract involves  the construction  of specified buildings that  will be built and sold according to specification and the contract of Istisna'a in this  case does not concern a particular  identified place (i.e.  the land).

3/2 Price and guarantees of Istisna'a contract

3/2/1 It is a requirement  that the price for an Istisna'a contract  be known at the conclusion of the contract,  in which case it can be in the form  of cash or  tangible  goods or  the usufruct  of an asset for a particular  duration, whether  such usufruct  is related to an asset other than the subject-matter or to the sub• ject-matter itself. The use of usufruct of the subject-matter itself as  consideration  for an Istisna'a contract  is  relevant to situations when a government  offers  a preferential contract giving usufruct  to the builder  or manufacturer  for a partic• ular duration, commonly  known as Build  Operate  'Transfer (BOT)

3/2/2 The price  of an Istisna'a contract  may be def2rred  or paid in instalments within  a certain period  of time, or if delivery of the subject-matter is  to be made  in stages a portion  of the price may be paid immediately while the balance is paid by instalments  according  to the stages of delivery. It  is  also permissible to connect payment with the stage of completion of the work,  (such that a payment  is made al the end of each stage) provided the stages of this type of work are by custom subject to specification  and their identification will not lead to dispute.

3/2/3 If the process of manufacture or construction  is divided into phases,  or  payment  is   designed  according  to  the  stage of completion of the work, then the manufacturer or contractor is  entitled to request that the ultimate  buyer make payment accordingly for each stage that has been carried out according to specification.



300





Shan'ah  Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a  and Parallel Istisna'a

3/2/4 It is permissible that the price of Istisna'a transactions  vary in accordance with  variations  in delivery date.  There  is  also no objection  to a number  of offers being subject  to negotiation, provided   that  eventually  only  one  offer  will be  chosen  for concluding  the Istisna'a contract.  This is  to avoid uncertainty and lack of knowledge that may lead to dispute.
3/2/5  A contract of Istisna'a  cannot   be  drawn  up on  the  basis of a Murabahah sale,  for  example,  by determining the  price of Istisna'a on a cost- plus basis.

3/2/6 If the  actual  costs  incurred by  the  Institution  to  bring  the subject-matter to completion   are substantially   less  than  the estimated  costs or the Institution   secures a discount  from  the party  with whom  it  contracted on a Parallel Istisna'a basis to acquire  the  subject-matter  in order  to  fulfil  its contractual obligation,  the  Institution  is  not  obliged  to give a discount to  the ultimate purchaser and the latter is not entitled  to the amount   or part  thereof  the  Institution  has  gained  over  the estimated  costs.  The  same  rule  applies  conversely  when  the actual  costs of production are substantially greater  than  the estimated  costs.

3/3  Guarantees

3/3/1  It is permissible  for the Institution,  acting either in the capacity of the  manufacturer  or of the  ultimate  purchaser,  to give  or demand  accordingly  'Arboun as a guarantee, which  will either
be part  of the price,  if the contract  is  fulfilled, or forfeited,  if
the  contract  is  rescinded.  However,  it  is  pref rable  that  the amount  forfeited  be  limited  to an amount  equivalent  to the actual damage suffered.
3/3/2 In an Istisna'a  contract,  it is  permissible  for the  Institution, whether acting  in the capacity  of manufacturer or in the ca• pacity of the  ultimate  purchaser,  to demand  guarantees  that it considers  sufficient  to secure fulfilment of its  rights against



301





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

an ultimate purchaser or a manufacturer. It is also permissible for the institution, when  acting in the capacity of an ultimate purchaser, to give guarantees  requested  by the manufacturer, which  can  be  in a form  of a mortgage,  personal  guarantee, assignment  of rights, a current account, or an investment  ac• count  or consent  to blocking withdrawal  from  an account.

4. Changes to Istisna'a  Contract

4/1  Amendments,  changes and  introduction of new conditions

4/1/1  It is permissible,  after the conclusion  of an Istisna'a  contract, for  the manufacturer  and the  ultimate  purchaser  to agree on amending   the  manufacturing or  construction  specifications previously agreed upon or introducing  additional specification requirements on condition that the price is  adjusted accordingly and a reasonable period for the execution f the new requirements is  granted.  It is  also permissible  to state in the contract  that the consideration  for  amendments  or  introduction  of additional requirements  shall be  determined   and added  to  the  original price as per the expert  opinion,  custom  or an identified price index which preclude any uncertainty  that may potentially lead to dispute.

4/1/2  The  ultimate  purchaser  cannot  oblige  the manufacturer to introduce  modifications  and  changes to the subject matter  of an Istisna'a contract  without  the consent  of the manufacturer.

4/1/3  I is  not permissible  for amendments and changes to the contract to be agreed on the basis  that an additional  sum will be paid in consideration  for  an  extension  of the  period  of payment. However,  a rebate for pre-payment is permissible provided it is not stipulated at the conclusion of the contract.

4/2  Intervening  contingencies (force majeure)

4/2/1  It is permissible,  by way of agreement of the contracting  parties or arbitration  or judicial procedure,  to amend the contract price



302





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

of an Istisnaa  contract  upwards or downwards,  as a result of intervening  contingencies  (force  majeure).  This rule must be read together with item  4/1/3  above.

4/2/2 It is  permissible for the Institution  to replace a contractor  and enter  into an Istisna'a  contract  with a customer  to complete a project  which had been started  by the previous  contractor of such a customer.  In this case,  an assessment of the project should  be undertaken   on  the  basis  of the  existing  status  of the  project.  The cost of this  assessment  is  chargeable  to  the account of the customer,  in which case all outstanding  debts, if any, that arise from the incomplete  Istisna'a contract shall be the  personal  responsibility  of the  customer.  The parties  may after this  conclude a new Istisna'a contract  for the remaining work. The Institution  is  not bound  to deal with the previous contractor.  Rather,  the  Institution   has the  right  to  stipulate that  the  work needed  to complete  the project will be carried
out by any means it deems fit.

4/2/3 In the case of constructing  buildings or public utilities on land owned by the ultimate purchaser,  it  is  permissible to stipulate that the ultimate purchaser has the right to perform the contract of Istisna'a at  the  expense  of the  manufacturer   if the  latter fails  to perform  the  contract  or to  complete  the  work within a  particular  period of time,  and that  this  performance  will be effected from the date the manufacturer  halted the work.

4/2/4  If the contractor is unable to continue to discharge his obligation, the  ultimate purchaser  (the  owner of the  land)  is  not entitled to acquire ownership of the incomplete  building structures  or utilities  that are already in  place  without  giving consideration to the contractor.  However,  this  rule depends on the cause  of the failure  to continue the work. If the failure to perform is  due to the misconduct  of the contractor, the ultimate purchaser  is liable only for the value of  the building structure and the builder is  liable  to  compensate  the  uJtimate  purchaser  for  any actual



303





Shan'ah  Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

damage or loss he suffered. Ifthe failure to perform  is due to the misconduct  of the  ultimate purchaser, the contractor is entitled to the value of the work he has completed and compensation for any damage or loss.  However,  if the filure  to perform  has not been caused by either  of them,  the ultimate purchaser  is liable only for the value of the building structure that is already in place and neither of them has any responsibility  to pay compensation for  the  loss  or damage  the  other  party  had  suffered.  [see  item
4/2/3]

4/2/5  It is permissible  that a contract of Istisna'a  includes  a clause to the effect that if any additional  conditions are inserted into the contract  at a later date as a result of directives  of the relevant authorities,   and  these   additional  conditions  lead  to  extra expenses  that  cannot,  by virtue  of the  terms  of the  contract, be borne  by the  manufacturer because  they  were  not  in the original  contract  as signed  or  there  is   no  law  making  such payment  compulsory,, the extra expenses  will be borne  by the ultimate  purchaser.

5. Supervision  of the Execution of an Istisna'a Contract

5/1  It is  permissible  for the  seller and  purchaser   to appoint  technically experienced consulting firm to represent  it in determining whether the subject-matter conforms  to the contractual specification, and to advise the Institution  as to whether  payment  for the subject-matter, or  delivery  or  acceptance   of it,   under   the  terms  of the  contract, should  take place,  and they should  adhere  to its  resolutions

5/2  It  is  permissible for the Institution, when  acting as the manufacturer, to draw-up  an independent and separate contract  of agency appoint• ing the ultimate purchaser  as an agent of the Institution to supervise the  manufacturing or construction process  so as to ensure  that  the items produced conform  to contractual specification.
5/3  It is  permissible for the manufacturer and the ultimate purchaser  to agree on the party who will bear the additional  costs of supervision of an Istisna'a contract.



304





Shan'ah  Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a  and Parallel Istisna'a

6. Delivery  and  Disposal of  the Subject-Matter

6/1  The manufacturer is discharged  from liability if the subject-matter is delivered  to either  the ultimate purchaser or to a person  appointed by him or if the ultimate purchaser is enabled  to exercise full control over the subject-matter.

6/1/1  If the  condition  of the  subject-matter  does  not  conform  to the  contractual  specifications  at   the  date  of  delivery,   the ultimate  purchaser  has the right to reject the subject-matter or to accept it in its present condition,  in which case the acceptance
constitutes  satisfactory  performance   of the contract.  It is  also
permissible  for the contracting parties to agree on acceptance of a subject-matter  that  fails to conform   to the  specification even if such an arrangement involves  a price discount.

6/1/2  If the seller offers to deliver a better  quality, then the purchaser shall accept  his conditions,  provided  that  the seller  shall not charge  any  additional   amounts   for the  better  quality,  which may  be considered   one  of the  ways  in  which  a contract   is ethically fulfilled, unless the quality specified in the contract  is particularly pursued  by the purchaser.

6/2  It  is  permissible  that  delivery   of  the  subject-matter  takes  place before the due date, on condition that the subject-matter meets the specifications  agreed  upon,  in which  case  the  ultimate   purchaser is  obliged  to  accept  the  subject-matter.  If the  ultimate  purchaser
is  unwilling  to take delivery  of the  subject-matter,  the  rule  on this
point depends on whether or not there is justification forth is refusal. If there  is  a good  reason  for the rejection  of the subject-matter, the ultimate purchaser shall not  be obliged  to accept  it.  If there  is  not a good  reason  for rejecting  it, then  the ultimate  purchaser will be obliged  to accept  the subject-matter.
6/3  The delivery of the subject-matter may take place through  constructive possession,  by  enabling  the ultimate purchaser  to take control  over the subject-matter after the production process  is  completed.  At this



305





Shan'ah Standard  No. (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel  Istisna'a

point,  the liability of the manufacturer  in respect of the subject-matter comes to an end and the liability of the ultimate purchaser  begins. If after enabling the ultimate purchaser to take control  over the subject• matter any loss  or damage subsequently  occurs to the subject-matter without  any proof of negligence  or misconduct  on the  part of the manufacturer,  then the ultimate purchaser  is liable.   This is  therefore the  demarcation  line  between  the  liabilities ct the  two  parties:  the liability of the manufacturer  and the liability cf the ultimate purchaser.

6/4  If the ultimate purchaser  refuses to accept the subject-matter  without a good reason after he is enabled to take possession,  the subject-matter will remain in the possession of the manufacturer  on a trust basis,  in which case the manufacturer  will not be liable for loss  or damage that occurs  to it,  unless such loss  or damage is  a result of negligence or misconduct  on  the part of the manufacturer.  The ultimate purchaser bears the expenses for the safe keeping cf the subject-matter.

6/5  It is permissible to state in a contract of Istisna'a that the manufacturer will act as  the  agent  ct the  ultimate  purchaser  to  sell the  subject• matter  if there  is   a delay  on  the  part  of the  purchaser  in  taking delivery  of the  subject-matter  within  a particular   period  of time. In this case,  the manufacturer will sell the subject-matter on behalf ct the  ultimate  purchaser  and,  after deducting  the  agreed  contract price,  the  balance,  if any,  will be returned  to  the  purchaser.  If the price obtained  is less  than  the contract price, the manufacturer shall have a right of recourse to the ultimate purchaser for the recovery of the remaining  balance.  In addition,  the ultimate  purchaser  will bear the expenses incurred in selling the subject-matter.

6/6  It  is  permissible  for the contract  of Istisna'a  to include  a  fir penalty clause stipulating an agreed amount  of money for compensating  the ultimate purchaser  adequately if the manufacturer  is late  in delivering the subject-matter. Such compensation  is  permissible  only  if the delay
is  not caused by intervening  contingencies (force majeure).  However,
it is  not permitted  to stipulate a penalty clause against the  ultimate purchaser  for default  on payment.  [see  item  2/1/2  of the  Shari'ah Standard  No.  (3)  on Procrastinating  Debtor]



306





Shan'ah  Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

6/7  It is  not permissible to sell the subject-matter  prior  to taking either actual or constructive  possession  of it  [see item 6/4].  However, it is permissible  to conclude  an Istisna'a contract  to sell an item on the basis of description or specification  that  is similar  to an item  to be acquired  from a manufacturer,  and  this  is  called Istisnaa Muwazi: Parallel  Istisna'a [ see item  7].

6/8  It is  permissible for the Institution  acting in the capacity of ultimate purchaser  to appoint,  after taking  possession  of the subject-matter, the  manufacturer  as an agent  to  sell the  subject-matter   to  latter's customers  on  behalf of the  Institution.  This  agency is  permissible whether  it  is  carried  out free  of charge,  or for  consideration  either in the form of a fixed foe or a particular  percentage  of the sale price, on condition  that the contract  of agency and the contract  of Istisna'a were not entered  into in connection  with each other.

7. Parallel lstisna'a

7/1   It is   permissible   for  the  Institution  to  buy  items  on  the  basis  of a clear  and  unambiguous  specification   and  to  pay,  with  the  aim ct providing  liquidity  to the manufacturer,  the price in cash when the contract  is  concluded.  Subsequently,  the Institution   may enter
into  a contract  with  another  party  in order  to sell,  in the capacity of manufacturer  or  supplier,  items  whose  specification  conforms to the  wishes of that  other  party, on the basis of parallel  Istisna'a, and fulfil  its contractual  obligation  accordingly.  This is permissible on condition  that  the delivery date stipulated  in  the parallel  (sale)
contract  must  not precede  that  stipulated  in  the original  purchase contract,  and, moreover, the two contracts should  remain  separate from each other.  [see  item  3/1/4]

7/2  It is  permissible  for the  Institution,  acting  in  the  capacity  of the producer  or supplier, to conclude an Istisna'a contract with the aim of selling such items  to the customer  on a def 2rred  payment  basis,  and to enter  into a Parallel  Istisna'a contract  on  an immediate  payment basis with a manufacturer  or builder to acquire such items  as per the specifications in the first contract and sell them to the customer.  This



307





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel 1stisna'a

is  permissible  on  condition  that  the  two  contracts  should  remain separate  and,  moreover,  be  subject  to  the  matters  set  out  in item
3/1/4.

7/3  As a result  of concluding  an  Istisna'a  contract  in  the capacity  of a producer   or  supplier,  the Institution   must  assume  liability  for ownership risk and maintenance and insurance expenses prior to delivering the subject-matter to the ultimate purchaser ( the customer). Moreover,  the Institution  is not permitted,  in the Parallel Istisna'a contract  concluded  with the manufacturer,  to transfr  to the latter the risk arising from  its  obligations  towards the customer.

7/4 It is not permissible to make any contractual  link between the obligations  under  two  contracts  (the  contract  of Istisna'a and  the contract  of Parallel  Istisna'a)  when  they  are  concluded.  Therefore, it is  also not permissible  for a party to an ordinary  Istisna'a contract (I)  to  withdraw  his contractual  obligations  or delay delivering  the subject-matter  of the contract  because the obligation under  Parallel Istisna'a  did not take  place or (II)  to increase the price of the goods to  be  delivered  because  of an increase  in the cost of goods  in the
Parallel Istisna'a.  However,  there is  no restriction  on the right of the
Institution to stipulate  conditions and requirements  when concluding a Parallel lstisna'a contract as a purchaser, including a penalty clause similar to,  or different from,  that which the customer  has stipulated in the first Istisna'a contract  in which the Institution  is the supplier.
8. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued  en 29 Safar 1422  A.H., corresponding  to 23  May
2001  A.D.














308





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel 1stisna'a





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Standard  on Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a was adopted by the Shar'ah Board in its meeting No. (6)  held on 25-29  Safar 1422 A.H., corresponding to 19-23  May 200I A.D.

In its  meeting No.  (8)  held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 28 Safar  •
4 Rabf'  I 1423  A.H.,  corresponding to  11-16  May 2002  A.D.,  the Shari'ah
Board  readopted a resolution to reformat the Shari'ah rules for Istisna'a and
Parallel  Istisna'a in the form of a Shari'ah standard.






































309





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No.  (5) held  in Makkah Al-Mukarramah  on 8-12 Ramadan
1421  A.H. corresponding  to 4-8 December, 2000 A.D., the Shari'ah Board decided to give priority to the preparation of the a Shari'ah  rules for Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a.

On  Monday  11    Shawwal   1420  A.H. corresponding to  17  January  2000
A.D.,  the Fatwa and Arbitration  Committee recommended  to the Shari'ah Board  the commissioning  of a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic  study and an exposure draft on the Shari'ah  Rules for Istisna'a and Parallel  Istisna'a.

In its  meeting  held in Bahrain  on 21-23 Muharram  1421  A.H., corre• sponding  to 26-28 April 2000 A.D., the Fatwa and Arbitration Committee discussed the exposure  draft of  the Shari'ah Rules for Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a  and  asked  the  consultant  to  make  amendments  in light  of the comments  made by the members.
In its  meeting No.  (4)  held  in Abu Dhabi, United  Arab Emirates on  14
Sha'ban  1421  A.H. corresponding to  10 November  2000 A.D., the  Fatwa and Arbitration Committee discussed  the exposure  draft and made some relevant amendments.

The  revised exposure  draft  of  the  Shari'ah  Rules was  presented  to  the Shari'.ah   Board  in  its  meeting  No.   (5)  held  in  Makkah  Al-Mukarramah on 8-12  Ramadan  1421  A.H.  corresponding  to 4-8 December  2000 A.D. The  Shari'ah  Board  made  further  amendments   to  the  exposure  draft  of the  standard  and decided  that  it  should  be distributed  to specialists and interested  parties  to  obtain  their  comments  in  order  to  discuss  them  in a public hearing.



310





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel 1stisna'a

A public  hearing was held in Bahrain  on 4-5  Dhul-Hajjah   1421  A.H., corresponding  to 27-28 February 2001  A.D. The public hearing was attended by more than  thirty  participants  representing central  banks,  Institutions,
accounting firms,  Shari'ah  scholars,  academics and others who are interested in this field. Members of the Shari'ah Studies Committee  responded  to the written  comments that were sent prior to the public hearing as well as to the oral comments that were expressed in the public hearing.

The  Fatwa  and  Arbitration   Committee   held  its  meeting  No.   (5)  in
Bahrain  on  15  Dhul-Hajjah  1421  A.H.,  corresponding   to  10  March  2001
A.D.,  to  discuss  the  comments  made  about   the  exposure   draft    The committee  made  the necessary  amendments in light of both  the written comments that  were received  and  oral  comments  that  took  place in the public hearing.

The Shari'ah  Board  in its meeting No  (6)  held in Al-Madinah  Al-Mun• awwarah on 25-29  Safar  1422  A.H.,  corresponding  to 19-23  May 2001  A.D., discussed the amendments  made by the Fatwa and Arbitration  Committee, and made necessary amendments.  The standard  was adopted  in the name
of Shari'ah  Rules  for  Istisna'a  and Parallel  Istisna'a.  Some  paragraphs  were
adopted by the unanimous  vote of  the members of  the Sharf'ah  Board while the other paragraphs were adopted by the majority vote of the members,  as recorded in the minutes  of the Sharah  Board.

The  Shari'ah  Board  decided  in  its  meeting  No. (7)   held  in  Makkah Al-Mukarramah   on  9-13 Ramadan  1422  A.H.  corresponding   24-28 No• vember  200I   A.D.  to reformat  all  Shari'ah  rules in the  form of  standards and a committee was formed for this purpose.
In its  meeting No.  (8) held  in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah  on 28 Safar
- 4 Rab~' I  1423 A.H.  corresponding to 11-16 May 2002  A.D., the Sharf'ah Board  adopted  the reformatting  of the  Shari'ah  Rules for investment  and Financing No.  (4)  on Istisna'a  and Parallel  Istisna'a  in the name of Shari'ah Standard  No.  (11) on Istisna'a  and Parallel  Istisna'a  without any substantial
changes in the content.

The  Shari'ah  Standards  Review Committee   reviewed  the  standard  in its  meeting held  in Rab'  II 1433  A.H.  corresponding to March  2012  A.D.



311





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel 1stisna'a

in the State of Qatar, and proposed  after deliberation  a set of amendments (additions,  deletions,   and  rephrasing)   as  deemed   necessary,  and  then submitted  the proposed   amendments to the  Shari'ah  Board  for  approval as it deemed  necessary.

In its meeting  No.  (4)  held in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah,  Kingdom
of  Saudi   Arabia  on  27-29  Sha'ban   1436   A.H.   corresponding   to  14-16
June  2015  A.D.,  the  Sharf'ah  Board  discussed  the proposed  amendments submitted  by the Shari'ah  Standards Review Committee.  After deliberation, the Shari'.ah  Board  approved  necessary amendments,  and the standard  was
adopted  in its  current amended  version.









































312





Shan'ah  Standard  No. (11):  Istisna'a  and Parallel  1stisna'a





Appendix  (B)

The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Legitimacy of Istisna'a Contract

The legitimacy  ofIstisna'a  is based on the request of the Prophet  (peace be upon  him)  that  a pulpit  (a  platform)  for preaching  and  a finger ring be manufactured  for him.@  An Istisna'a contract  is  also permissible  on the basis  of the  principle  of Istihsan  (Shari'ah  approbation),   the general principles  of contracts and transactions  and the objectives of Shari'ah.  The Istisna'a  is a binding  contract  and not a mere promise.  The International Islamic Fiqh Academy has issued  a resolution  in support  of the legitimacy of Istisna'a.
Istisna'a Contract
■  The basis  for it  not being  permissible that  the  role of the Institution remain  as a mere financier  for a deal concluded  between the supplier and the ultimate  purchaser  is  that this would  lead  to involvement  in a Riba transaction  which makes the Istisna'a  contract a mere cover-up and not a real Istisna'a.
■  The basis  for stating that an Istisna'a contract  is  binding is  the view of Imam  Abu Yusuf,  as stated  in  the  "Majjalat Al-Ahkam  AI-'Adliyyah", (known  in  English   by the name the Mejelle),  that the manufacturer  has spent money in order to manufacture and to deliver according to speci• fication.  If the ultimate  purchaser has a right to refuse the manufactured goods,  then the manufacturer  will incur  losses.

(2)  The Hadith in which the Prophet  (peace be upon him)  requested the manufacture of finger ring has been related by  AI-Bukahri and  Muslim:  "Sahih Al-Bukhari"  [5:  220]; and  "Sahih  Muslim" [3:  1655]). The Hadith in which the Prophet  (peace be upon him) requested the manufacture of a pulpit for  preaching  has been related by Al-Bukhari in his Sahih" [2: 908].
(3)  International Islamic Fiqh Academy  Resolution   No. 65 (3/7).



313





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

The basis for the impermissibility of the manufacturer including a def ct exclusion clause in an Istisna'a  contract  is  that a valid Istisna'a is  a sale of specified goods to be delivered in the future and exclusion of liability as to defects is  valid only in the sale ct particular  identified  goods. This prohibition  of excluding liability  as to def cts  in Istisna'a   is one feature that makes it diffierent  from an ordinary sale.
The basis for the impermissibility of drawing  up Istisna'a contracts  or procedures in a way that appears to be a mere interest-based  financing is the need to avoid involvement  in a Riba transaction,  a potential  Riba or 'Inah sales.
Subject Matter of, and Guarantees in, an Istisna'a Contract
+  The basis for  the impermissibility  of concluding  an Istisna'a  contract for items  that  are not manufactured  a constructed  is  that items that are not the subject of transformation by manufacture  or construction by man,  that  is  natural  things  such  as animals,  fruits and vegetables, are not by definition  covered  by the term  Istisna'a which means a sale of materials  on condition  that they be subjected  to transformation by a manufacturing or construction  process.
• The basis for the permissibility of concluding an Istisna'a for manufac• tured  items  that either  have or do not have equivalents  in the market is  because  it is  normal  for  people  to  deal in these  kinds  of item.  As a principle, rules that are based on customary practice will change whe• never such  customary  practice  is cbanged. Therefore, any customary transaction  that is subject to specifications may be a subject-matter  of Istisna'a,  regardless of whether  it is  for use or consumption.
+  The basis for not allowing the subject-matter  of Istisna'a to be a specific
identified  item  is  that  an  Istisna'a  contract  involves  a  sale for  future delivery based on a specification.  Therefore,  if the items  to be sold  are specific  identified  items,  the  transaction  involves  selling  identified items  that  the  seller  does not own, which  is  prohibited  by the saying of the Prophet  (peace be upon  him):  "Do not sell what you  own nor

(4) The Hadith   has been  related  by A-Tirmidhi in his Sunan  "[3: 534], edited  by Ahmad
Shakir;  and AI-Albani, lrwad AL-Ghall" [5:  132].



314





Shan'ah  Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

Again,  items  to be manufactured  or constructed  do not yet exist and thus  cannot be specific and identified.  The  non-existent  item is to be produced  and delivered later and this constitutes a non-monetary obligation of the supplier.
The basis for the permissibility of a stipulation by the ultimate purchaser
that the manufacture  be  carried out by the Institution  itself is  because this  stipulation  does  affect the  purpose  of the  contract.  Rather,  this condition  is  relevant in this  contract  because the  ultimate  purchaser may be interested in the items that are produced by a particular supplier due  to  this  supplier's distinguished  competence  in manufacturing   or construction  and the quality cf the items  manufactured  or constructed by this  supplier.
+  The basis  for  the permissibility  of the manufacturer  presenting to  the
ultimate purchaser  either what he has produced  or what other parties have produced, ifthe ultimate purchaser did not stipulate to the contrary. is  because this  satisfies  the purpose  of the contract.  This  is  the  case because the  items are  being delivered according  to  the specifications that are laid  down in the contract.
• The basis for the permissibility of stipulating a time-period  during which manufacturer remains  liable for  any manufacturing  or  construction def ects  is  that such a stipulation  serves the purpose of the contract.  This is  because the ultimate  purchaser  warts  to  use the subject-matter  and this  is  not possible  unless the subject-matter  is  free from defects.
■  The basis for the requirement that the price be known  is  to remove any lack  of knowledge  and uncertainty  that may lead  to dispute.
• The  basis  for  the  permissibility  in  Istisna'a  of payment  on  def 2rred
terms or on an instalment  basis is  that labour (i.e. transformation and added value)   is an important part of the items  to be sold  and this makes the transaction  similar to a leasing  contract  in which  it is  permissible
for the rentals to be paid on a def zrred  or instalment  basis without this
being  considered  as  a sale of debt  for debt which  is  prohibited.  The same ruling applies to Istisna'a.

(5)  See:  "Majallat Al-Ahkam AI-Adliyya", article (158).



315





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

• The basis for the permissibility  of offering a difference  in the price for an Istisna'a contract  relating to  a difference  in the  date of delivery is that Istisna'a  is  analogous to an ljarah contract.  The fuqaha have stated that it  is  permissible  to give a labourer  in Ijarah  an option  regarding
wages depending  on whether  the worker finishes  the work in one day
or in two days.  The hirer  may say two  dinars if the worker  finishes  in one day or one dinar  if he finishes  in two  days.  Istisna'a is similar  to this.  There is a resolution  issued during  the Al Baraka Annual  Forum supporting  this ruling."
The basis for not allowing a contract  of Istisna'a  to be drawn up on the
basis   of a Murabahah  sale,  for example,  by  determining  the  price  of Istisna'a  on a cost- plus  basis,  is because the subject-matter  of Murabahah should be something  already in existence,  the cost  of which is  known and  which  is   owned  prior  to  the  conclusion   of a Murabahah   sale. An Istisna'a contract, on the other hand,  is concluded prior to ownership Of  the  subject-matter,  because (I)  it is   a sale based  on  a specification giving rise to a future  obligation,  and (II)  the actual cost will be known only after the completion  of the work,  and,  (III)  the price in a contract of Istisna'a  should  be known when the contract is  concluded.
• The  basis  for  deciding   that  the  Institution   is   not  obliged  to  give a discount  when  the actual costs  of the manufacture  are substantially greater  than  the  estimated  costs or  when  it  secures  a discount  from the manufacturer  is  because the Istisna'a contract  and Parallel  Istisna'a contract are independent  in terms of obligation and effects.  The Shari'ah Supervisory  Board  of the Kuwait Finance House has  issued  a Fatwa in this respect.
• The basis for the permissibility of the Institution  acquiring  all necessary
guarantees  is  that  these  guarantees  secure  its  rights and  this  request does affect the purpose  of a contract.
Changes  to an Istisna'a  Contract
■   The basis for the imperrnissibility  of extending  the date of payment  in return  for consideration  is  because that is  Riba.

(6)  See:  Resolution  No.  (13/7).
(7)  A1-Fatawa AI-Shar'iyyah FH  AL-Masa'il AHqtisadiyyah", Fatwa No.  (447).



316





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

The basis for the permissibility  of discounting  for unconditional  earlier payment is  the saying of the Prophet (peace be upon him) in the case of Ubay Ibn Ka'b  (may  Allah be pleased with him)  and his debtor:  "Write off a portion  of your debt"!" The International  Islamic Fiqh Academy has issued  a resolution in support  of this rule"9
■  The ultimate purchaser  (the  owner ct the land)  is not entitled to acquire
ownership ct incomplete  building structures  or utilities that are already in place without  giving consideration   to  the  builder  if the  builder  is unable to continue  to discharge  his obligation.  The basis  for this  is that the construction  was initiated by the builder at the request of the ultimate purchaser and such  a request is stronger than a mere permission  to build
on the latter's land.
The basis for the permissibility of a contract of Istisna'a including a clause that  the  manufacturer  is   not  liable  for extra expenses that  result  from additional  conditions  inserted into the  contract at a later  date  as a result of directives of the relevant  authorities, is because this condition is agreed upon by the parties  and does not affect the purpose of Istisna'a contract. The  Shari'ah   Supervisory  Board  ct Kuwait  Finance  House  has issued
a Fatwa in respect to this ruling.
The basis for the permissibility of a penalty dause in an Istisna'a contract is that such a clause  is  in the interest of the contract and because it is  laid down in respect to an obligation regarding items  that  must be produced and delivered in the future and not in respect to monetary  debt.
Supervision  of the Execution of an Istisna'a Contract
The basis for the permissibility  for the  Institution, when  acting  as the ultimate purchaser, to appoint a technically experienced  consulting firm and the permissibility  for the Institution, when  acting as the manufacturer, to appoint the ultimate  purchaser  as an agent is because agency is  permissible
and there  is  nothing  against  it  in  an Istisna'a  contract  provided  it  is  done with the agreement  of the parties.

(8)  The Hadith has been related by AI-Bukhari  in his "Sahih"   [1:  179]  and [2:  965].
(9)  International Islamic Figh Academy Resolution Na 64 (7/2)
(10)  See:  Fatwa No.  (251).



317





Shan'ah  Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a

Delivery  and Disposal of the Subject-Matter
The  basis  for the  impermissibility of selling  the  items to  be  produced prior  to taking  either  actual or constructive possession  of them  is that such an action  is  considered  as selling a non-existent item.  It is  also considered as selling what one does not own because  it  is not available for the seller at the time of conclusion  of the contract.

Parallel Istisna'a
The basis for the permissibility of the Institution entering into a contract with another party  in order  to sell,  in the capacity of manufacturer, builder or supplier,  items whose specification conforms  to the wishes of that other party,  on the basis of Parallel  Istisna'a, is that  in such  a case there  are two separate deals of Istisna'a. There is no link between  the two contracts; hence, this is not an instance of two sales in one deal, which  is  impermissible.  The separation of the two contracts  also has the effect of making  the transaction a type of non-Riha-based financing.
































318





Shan'ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Istisna'a Contract

Istisna'a is   a contract  of sale of specified  items to  be manufactured   or constructed,  with an obligation on the part of the manufacturer or builder (contractor)  to deliver them to the customer  upon completion.

Parallel Istaisna'a
Another  form  of Istisna'a,  known in modern  custom  as Parallel  Istisna'a al-Istisna  al-Muwazi", takes  effect through   two  separate  contracts.  In the  first  contract,  the  Islamic  Financial  Institution   acts  in  the  capacity of a manufacturer,  builder  or supplier  and concludes  a contract with the customer.  In the  second  contract,  the  Institution   acts  in the capacity  of a purchaser and concludes another contract with a manufacturer,  builder or supplier  in order to fulfil  its contractual  obligations towards the customer in the first contract. By this  process, a profit is realised through the difference in price between the two contracts and,  in most cases,  one of the two contracts is   concluded  immediately, (i.e.  the  Istisna'a  contract  entered  into with the manufacturer, builder or supplier), while the second contract (i.e. the contract entered into with the customer)  is  concluded later.

Difference Between  lstisna'a  and Ijarah
The contract  of Istisna'a  differs from the contract  of Ijarah   in the sense that the latter is  a contract  of services without  any commitment to supply materials  whereas  the  former  requires  that  the  manufacturer  or  builder provide  both  services  for the transformation or construction   process and ultimately to supply the materials in the form of the finished items.

Difference Between Istisna'a and a Standard  Construction Contract
The contract  of Istisna'a  also differs  from a standard construction  contract in that the latter is regarded as an ljarah contract if it is confined to providing



319





Sh ari' ah Standard  No.  (11):  Istisa'a  and Parallel Istisna'a

services only,  with  the materials to be provided  by the customer  (the person who  engaged  the  Institution  to  carry out  the  construction  work).   But  if a construction contract requires  the builder  to provide both the services and the materials  needed  to fulfil  the contract, then  it is an Istisna'a contract.

Difference  Between Istisna'a and Salam

The Istisna'a contract  also differs  from  a Salam contract in the sense that the former  is  a contract that  involves a sale of specified  items that  have by nature to be manufactured or constructed. In other words, an lstisna'a contract is applicable  to materials  that  require transformation  by a manufacturing or construction process. 'The Salam, on the other  hand, is a contract  of sale of specified goods, the permissibility of which is not attached  to a condition  that the goods must be  manufactured or constructed.





































320






















Shari'ah  Standard No.  (12)



Sharikah(Musharakah)

and Modern Corporations


(Revised Standard)












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        326

I.  Scope  of the Standard ..........sos.sos.so.so.so.ososoooooooooo.sos.a.....                            326
2.  Definitions, Classifications and Types of Sharikat al-'.Aqd..................        326
3.  First Category: Traditional Fiqh-Nominate  Partnerships...................        327
3/1  General rulings of Sharikah, especially Sharikat al-'Inan                   327

3/2 Partnership in creditworthiness or reputation..............................         337
3/3  Service partnerships (professional or vocational  partnerships
and partnerships in skilled trades)...............................................        337
4.  Second Category:  Modern Corporations..............................................        338
4/1  Stock company..................................................................................         338
4/2 Joint-liability company.....................................................................        342
4/3  Partnership  in commendum ........as...o»a.or.so.a.a.oo.a.a.a..a.....     343
4/4 Company limited by shares..............................................................        344
4/5  Allotment/particular (Muhassah) partnership..............................        345
5  Diminishing  Musharakah .......sos.moos«ooh.moos»moo»or+.                346
6.  Date of Issuance ci the Standard............................................................        348
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        349
Appendices
Appendix (a):   Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard.............        350
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard....................................         352
Appendix (c);   Definitions.............................................................................          363










323








IN  THE NAME OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the  worlds,  and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and  all his companions





Preface


The objective of this standard  is  to explain the basis and general rulings for Sharikat al-'Aqd, (contractual partnership) which is known today as Musharakah, including  the rulings for joint  partnership, reputation  (cred• itworthiness)  partnership, vocation  partnership,  diminishing partnership and modern  corporations. The explanation  of these partnerships includes definitions,  rulings  applicable  to  each partnership  and  the  Shari'ah  lim• itations  that  must  be taken  into  account  by Islamic  financial  Institutions (Institution/Institutions).0

























(1) The  word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



325





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard  covers all forms of traditional  Fiqh-nominate partnerships that  operate  on the  basis of Sharikat  al-Aqd  (contractual partnership), except  the  partnerships  that  are  explicitly  excluded  by this   standard as  indicated  below. The  standard   also  applies  to  all modern   forms  of partnerships including  diminishing Musharakah. The standard  does not cover ownership  partnership where  the parties jointly  own an asset.  It does not  include  rules for Sharikat  al-Mufawadah because  the practical application of this form of partnership is  rare and, if need be,  ref zrence should  be made to Fiqh books.  The standard  does not cover Mudarabah, because  this  form  ct partnership  has  a separate  standard.  In the  same vein,  it does  not  cover  sharecropping  partnerships,  such  as irrigation and agricultural  partnerships. The standard  also does not cover, as far as modern  partnerships are concerned, regulatory policies and procedures necessary  for operations  in the market.
2. Definition,  Classifications and Types of Sharikat al-'Aqd

2/1   Defi nition  of Sharikat al-'Aqd

Sharikat  al-Aqd  (contractual   partnership)  means  an agreement  be• tween two or more parties to combine their assets, labour or liabilities for the purpose  of making profits.
2/2  Classifications of Sharika t al-'Aqd

Sharikat  al-'Aqd is  classified into  two main categories: First  Category:  Traditional Fiqh-N ominate Partnerships. Second  Category:  Modern  Corporations.
2/2/1  The traditional Fiqh-nominate partnerships  are  as follows:

a) Sharikat al-' Inan (contractual partnership)



326





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah),  and Modern  Corporations

b)Sharikat  al-Wujuh  or Al-Dhimam, ie partnership of credit•
worthiness  or reputation  (liability partnership)

c) Sharikat  al-A'mal (vocational  partnerships and partnerships
for undertaking difficult  work or accepting  jobs)

2/2/2 Modern corporations  and their  well-known forms  are as fol•
lows:

a) Stock company

b) Joint-liability  company

c) Partnership  in commendum d)Company limited  by shares
e) Allotment  (Muhassah)  partnership

f) Diminishing  partnership  (this  partnership  has  originated from  Sharikat  al-' Inan)

3. First Category:  Traditional Fiqh-Nominate Partnerships

3/1  General rulings for Sharikah, especially Sharikat  al-Inan

Sharikat al-'Inan is a partnership  between two or more parties whereby each partner contributes  a specific  amount  ct money in a manner  that gives each one a right to deal in the assets of the partnership, on condition that  the profit  is  distributed  according  to the partnership   agreement and that  the losses are borne  in accordance  with the contribution  ct each partner  to the capital.

3/1/1  Conclusion  of a Sharikah  contract

3/1/1/1  A Sharikah  contract  can be  concluded   by agreement between  the  parties  concerned on  the basis of offer and acceptance.  The contract  of partnership should, if necessary,  be documented and registered  officially. The objectives of the partnership must be clearly spelt out in  the document ct partnership or in the articles of association  of the company.

3/1/1/2    It is permissible  for the Institution  to enter into a part• nership  contract  with  non-Muslims or  conventional banks to carry out  operations  acceptable  by Shari'ah



327





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

unless it has become evident that the funds  or items presented by these entities for the purpose of the part• nership are from non-permissible  sources.  In operating a partnership with non-Muslims or conventional banks, arrangements   must  be  made  to obtain  all necessary assurances  and  guarantees  that  rules  and  principles of the Sharf'ah  are observed  during  operations  of the partnership.  Among  such  guarantees  is   one  to  the effect that  the  operations  of the  company  be  either managed  or supervised  by an entity that observes the Sharf'ah  rules.

3/1/1/3   It  is permissible  for the Institutions to include  con• ventional banks as partners  in a syndicated financing which operates on the basis  of Shari'ah,  provided that the Institution secures the right to manage the partner• ship's  operations  and that  such operations  are subject to the Shari'ah supervision.  [see Shari'ah Standard No (24) on Syndicated  Financing]

3/1/1/4   It is permissible for the partners  to amend at any point of time the terms of a partnership  contract. They may make  changes  to  the  ratio  of profit-sharing,  taking into  account  that  any losses  are shared  according  to the share of each partner  in the partnership  capital.

3/1/2  The capital ofSharikah

3/1/2/1   In principle,  the  capital  of Sharikah  should  be  con• tributed   in  the  form  of monetary   assets  on  which one can  rely in order  to determine  the amount  of the capital and to recognise profit or loss.  Nevertheless,  it is permissible, with the agreement  of all partners, to provide  tangible  assets (commodities)  as  the  capital of Sharikah  after the monetary  values of these assets are determined and expressed in currency  in order to know the share  contributed by each partner.



328





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

3/1/2/2   If partners have contributed their  partnership cap• ital  in  different  currencies,  these  currencies  must be  translated  into  the  currency  of the  Sharikah  at current exchange  rates so as to determine the shares and liabilities  of each partner
3/1/2/3   The  share  of each  partner   in  the  capital  should  be determined,  whether   it  is   contributed  in  the  form of one lump sum or by more than  one payment  over time; i.e., when there is a need for additional funds to increase  the capital.
3/1/2/4   It is  not  permitted that  debts  (receivables)  alone  be used as a contribution  to the Sharikah capital. However, debts may form  part of the contribution  to the capital where they become  inseparable from other  assets that can  be presented  as  a contribution  to the capital  in Sharikah,  such  as when  a manufacturing  firm use its net assets as a contribution  to the capital.  [see Shari'ah Standard No.  (21)  on Financial Paper]

3/1/2/5   The  funds  of current  accounts,  although   they  are juristically  classified   as  loans  to  the  Institutions, can be presented as a contribution to the capital  in a Sharikah  either  with  the Institution  itself or with a third  party.

3/1/3  Managing  a Sharikah  venture

3/1/3/1    In principle, each partner  is entitled to act in the interest of the partnership  in the following transactions:  spot or def zrred  sales;  taking possession  or custody  of the partnership receivables; making payments  or deposits and providing  or receiving a mortgage on behalf of the partnership;  asking for  payment  of debts,  admission of liabilities,  taking  up  legal actions,  cancellation  of contracts,  rejecting defective goods,  renting the assets of the partnership,  processing  transfers  of rights  and



329





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corpo rations

debts;  requesting  credit  facilities  in  the interest  of partnership;  and  doing  what  is  customary   in the interest  of trading.  A partner   is  not  entitled  to  act against the interest  of the partnership   or to perform actions that will damage the partnership,  such as giving out  grants   or  loans,   unless  all the partners   have consented  to  such  an action.  However,  the  partner may give out  short-term  minor  loans  that  will not, according  to customary  practice,  affect the operation of partnership.

3/1/3/2   It is  permissible  for the  partners  to  agree  that  the management   of the partnership will be restricted  to certain partners  or to a single partner. In this case, the other  partners   are  bound  to  abide  by  their  consent not to act on behalf of the partnership.

3/1/3/3   It is permissible  for the partners  to appoint a manager other  than  one of the partners  and  pay him  a fixed remuneration that will be included  in the expenses  of the Sharikah.  It  is  also permissible  that  the partners set aside a portion  of the investment profit plus a fixed remuneration as a form of incentive for the manager. However, if the management  is  carried  out from the outset  for  a percentage   share  in  the  profit  earned, this action  classifies the manager  as a  Mudarib  and he is  only entitled  to a share  in the profit, if any, and deserves  no  further   remuneration  for  management
services.

3/1/3/4   It  is  not permitted,  in a Sharikah  contract,  to specify
a fixed remuneration for a partner  who contributes  in managing  the Sharikah  funds or provides  some  form of other  services,  such as accounting.  However,  it is permissible  to give him a greater share of profit than he would receive solely on the basis of his share in the partnership  capital.



330





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

3/1/3/5  I is permissible  that one of the partners  be appointed to provide services that are mentioned  in item 3/1/3/4 provided  that  the appointment  is  based  on an inde• pendent  contract  from  the Sharikah  contract  so that he may be dismissed as a manager at any point of time without  the need to amend or to terminate  the Shari• kah contract.  In this case, the appointed  partner  may earn a specific remuneration.

3/1/4  Guarantees  in a Sharikah  contract

3/1/4/1    All partners  in a Sharikah  contract maintain  the assets of the Sharikah on a trust basis. Therefore, no one is liable  except  in cases of misconduct,  negligence  or breach of contract.  It is  not permitted  to stipulate that a partner  in a Sharikah  contract guarantees  the capital of another  partner.

3/1/4/2   It is permissible  for a partner  in a Sharikah  contract to stipulate  that another  partner  provides  a personal guarantee  or a mortgage  to cover cases of misconduct, negligence  or breach  of contract.
3/1/4/3   A third  party  may provide  a guarantee  to make  up a loss of capital  of some  or all partners.   This  guar• antee   is   circumscribed  with   the   conditions  that (I)  the legal  capacity  and  financial  liability  of such a third  party  as a guarantor  are independent from the  Sharikah   contract,   (II)   the  guarantee   should neither  be provided  for consideration nor  linked  in
any manner  to the Sharikah  contract;  (Ill)  the third
party guarantor should  not own more than  a half of the  capital  in  the  entity  to be guaranteed,  and  (IV) the  guaranteed  entity  should   not  own  more  than
a half of  the capital  in the entity  that  undertakes to
provide  a guarantee.  In case of  a third  party's  under•
taking to guarantee,  the partner  benefiting  from such



331





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

an  undertaking  is not,  however,  entitled   either  to claim that  the Sharikah  contract  becomes  null  and void  or to  refuse  to  meet  his obligations  under  the contract  if the  guarantor  fails  to  meet  his  volun• tary  promise  to cover the  loss of his capital, on the grounds that he (the beneficiary)  entered into the Sharikah  contract   taking  into  account   the  state  of such  a third   party's  undertaking  to  guarantee   the loss  of his capital.

3/1/5  The outcome  ofSharikah  investments  (profit  and loss)

3/1/5/1   The Sharikah contract  should incorporate  a provision specifying the manner  of sharing profits between the parties.  The  allocation  of profits  must  be  made  in a manner  that  gives each partner  an undivided  per• centage of profit,  not a sum of money or a percentage of the capital.  [see  item  3/1/5/9]

3/1/5/2   It is  not permitted   to def er  the determination of the profit  percentages  due to each partner  until  the re• alisation  of  profit.  The  profit  percentage   for  each partner  must be determined at the conclusion of Sharikah  contract.  The parties  may bilaterally  agree to amend  the  percentages   of profit-sharing  on  the date of distribution.  Also,  a partner  may relinquish, on the date of distribution,  a part of the profit that is due to him in favour of another  party.
3/1/5/3   In principle,  the shares of profit may be in proportion to  the  percentage  of each  partner's  contribution  to the Sharikah  capital.  Nevertheless,  the partners  may agree  to  make  profit-sharing   not  proportionate  to their contributions to capital, provided the additional percentage of profit over the percentage of contribution to the capital is  not in favour of a sleeping partner.  If a partner  did  not  stipulate  a condition  that  he  be



332





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah),  and Modern  Corporations

a sleeping  partner,  then  he is entitled   to  stipulate an additional profit share over his percentage of contribution to the capital  even if he did not work.

3/1/5/4    It is  a requirement  that the proportions of losses borne by  partners   be  commensurate  with  the proportions of their contributions to the Sharikah capital.  It is  not permitted,  therefore,  to agree on holding  one partner or a group of partners  liable for the entire  loss or liable for a percentage of loss that does not match their share of ownership  in the partnership.  It is,  however,  valid that one partner  takes, without any prior condition, the responsibility  of bearing the loss at the time of the loss.

3/1/5/5   It  is  permissible  for  the  partners to  agree  on  the adoption of any method of allocation of profit, either permanent or variable, for example, by agreeing  that the percentages of profit shares in the first period  are one set of percentages and  in the second  period  are anothersetofpercentages,dependingonthedisparity of the two  periods  or the  magnitude of the  realised profit.   This   is   allowed   provided  that   using   such a method does not lead to the likelihood of a partner being precluded from  participation  in profit.
3/1/5/6   I is  not permitted  to start the allocation  of profit be• tween the partners  unless the operating costs, expenses and taxes are deducted  in calculating the profit and the capital of the Sharikah  is  maintained  intact.
3/1/5/7    I is not permitted  that the conditions or modes of profit allocation in a Sharikah contract  include any clause or condition that  may result in the probable  violation  of the  principle  of sharing  profit.  For example,  if a pre• determined amount  of profit or a specific percentage of  capital  is   assigned   to  one  of the  partners,   this assignment  will be rendered  void.  If the assignment



333





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

is  amended  before profit comes forth, profit shall be divided  in accordance  with what partners  agreed  on as to amendment.  Otherwise,  profit shall be  divided based on each partner's  respective share in capital.

3/1/5/8   Taking into  account  the  provisions  of item  3/1/5/3, it  is  permissible  to agree that  if the profit  realised is above a certain  ceiling,  the  profit  in excess of such a ceiling belongs to a particular  partner. The parties may also agree that if the profit is not over the ceiling or   is  below  the  ceiling,  the  distribution   will be  in accordance  with their agreement.

3/1/5/9   The profit  may be finally distributed   on the basis  cf the proceeds  of selling all the existing assets,  known as actual  valuation,  or  on  the  basis of constructive valuation ofassets which means valuation of the assets cf the Sharikah  at fair value. The receivables must be valued at the cash value that is expected to be realised, i.e. after deduction  cf an allowance for doubtful  debts. In  valuing  receivables,  it  is   not  permitted   to  take account  of the time value of money  (interest)  or the notion  of discount  on the basis of current  value, i.e. a discount  of the amount  of the debt as consideration for   earlier   payment,   and   cash  amounts   shall   be
recognized  as is.

3/1/5/10 I is  not  permitted  that  the  final  allocation  of profit take place based on expected profit, i.e. it is  necessary that  the  allocation  cf profit  take  place  on the  basis of actual profit earned through  actual or constructive valuation  of the sold assets.

3/1/5/11 I is  permissible to allocate some funds to any cf the partners  on account, i.e. before actual or constructive valuation, on condition  that the final actual settlement will take place at a later  stage.  In this  case,  the parties



334





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corpo rations

should  undertake to  reimburse  to the  Sharikah  any amount   that  they  have  received  in  excess  of their share of profit after actual or constructive  valuation.

3/1/5/12 If the  subject  matter  of Sharikah  is   assets  acquired for leasing that bring in income or the subject matter is services  that  bring  in  revenue,  then  the  amount distributed   to  the  partners   annually  is  on  account, and it is  subject to settlement  and  reimbursement at the end of the Sharikah.

3/1/5/13 It is  permissible,  based on the articles  of association or  a decision  of the  partners,  not  to  distribute   the profits  of the  company.  It is  also permissible  to  set aside periodically  a certain ratio of profit as a solvency reserve  or  as a reserve  for meeting  losses  of capital (investment  risk reserve)  or  as a profit  equalisation reserve.

3/1/5/14 It is permissible  to agree on setting aside a proportion
of profit for  non-partners as a charitable  donation.

3/1/6  Maturity of Sharikah

3/1/6/1   Each  partner   is  entitled  to  terminate   the  Sharikah (i.e.  to withdraw  from  the  partnership)  after  giving his partner/s due notice  to this effct,  in which  case he shall be entitled to his share in the partnership, and this withdrawal would not necessitate the termination of the  partnership  of the  remaining   partners.  It is permissible  for the partners  to  enter  into  a binding promise  for  the  continuity   of the  partnership  for a period  of time. In this case, it is  permissible  for the parties  to agree to terminate   the partnership before such a fixed period. In all these cases, the obligations and  actions  that  took  place before termination  will remain  unaffiected and they will continue  to exist.



335





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corpo rations

3/1/6/2    It is  permissible for a partner to issue a binding promise to buy, either within the period of operation or at  the time of liquidation,  all the assets of the Sharikah  as per their market value or as per agreement at the date of buying.  It is  not permissible, however,  to promise to buy the assets of the Sharikah  on the basis  of face value.

3/1/6/3   A Sharikah  venture comes to an end at the expiry date or before the expiry date if the partners  agree to  terminate  it prematurely, or, in the case of part• nership in a particular business, by actual liquidation cf the assets that constitute the subject matter cf the partnership. The termination  of a Sharikah can take place on the basis of constructive liquidation. In this case,  the Sharikah  will be regarded as if it  has been ended and the parties have commenced  a new part• nership whereby the assets that were not sold through actual liquidation,  but have been valued on the basis of constructive liquidation, will be considered as the capital  of the new partnership.  If the liquidation  is based on the expiry date, then all the existing assets shall be sold  according to current  market values and the proceeds will be used as follows:
a)  Payment of liquidation expenses.

b)  Payment ct financial liabilities from the net assets
of the partnership.

c)  Distribution  of the  remaining  assets among  the partners  in accordance  with their  percentage  of contribution  to the capital. If the assets fill short and the partners  do not recover all of their contri• buted capital,  the distribution shall take place on a pro rata basis to the shares of capital.



336





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

3/2  Partnership in creditworthiness or reputation  (liability partnership)

3/2/1  A partnership  in creditworthiness  (partnership  of liability)  is a bilateral agreement  between  two or more parties  to conclude a partnership to buy assets on credit on the basis of their reputation for  the purpose  of making  profit,  whereby  they  undertake to fulfil their obligations  according  to the percentages  determined by  the  parties.  In addition,  the  parties  should  determine  for each  partner the percentage of profit  sharing and of liability sharing, which latter may, by agreement,  differ, downwards or upwards,  from the percentage of profit sharing.

3/2/2 The  partnership  in  creditworthiness  has no  monetary   cap• ital.  This  is  because  the  subject  matter  of the  partnership  is an obligation or a liability that is contingent on creditworthiness (outstanding  reputation).  This is  the obligation  of the partners
to pay the amount  of debts created through  purchases on credit, which  form the liability of the partners.  Therefore, the parties should agree on the ratio of  liability for which  each partner  is responsible when paying such debts.

3/2/3  The  profit  shall  be  distributed  according to  the  agreement.
However,  the  loss  will be  borne  by  each  partner according to  the  ratio  that   each  partner  had  undertaken  to  bear  in proportion to overall assets that  are purchased on credit.  It is not  permitted that  the  contract of partnership  incorporates a provision   that  specifies  a  lump  sum  from   the  profit  for a particular partner.

3/3  Service partnerships (professional or vocational partnerships  and partnerships in skilled  trades)

3/3/1  A service  partnership  is  an agreement   between  two  or more parties  to provide  services pertaining to a profession, vocation or  skilled  trade  or  to  render   some  services  or  professional advice or to manufacture goods,  and to share profit according to an agreed upon  ratio.



337





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah),  and Modern Corporations

3/3/2 The service partnership  has no monetary  capital. This is because the  subject  matter   of the  partnership   is   rendering   services. There  is  no  Shari'ah  implication  regarding  any disproportion in the services  the partners  or their  representatives  may have rendered.  The partners   may also distribute  different  types  of services among themselves and may assign  some or al] partners a set of services or a particular  service in a way that will achieve the integration  and purpose  of the overal1 service to be rendered.
3/3/3  The  profit  shall be  distributed   among  the partners   according to  the  agreed  ratio,  but  the  contract  should  not  specify  that a lump  sum be paid from the profit to a particu1ar partner.

3/3/4  If the  service  partnership  requires  capital  goods  (e.g, equip• ment  or tools),  then  it is  permissible  for each party to provide the necessary goods that his services require, in which case each partner owns the goods he has provided. The partners  may con• tribute funds to acquire the goods on the basis of a partnership in ownership.  It is  also permissible  for  a party to a Sharikah contract  to provide  the capital goods required  by the partner•
ship in consideration  for  fees  that  will be charged  against  the
Sharilcah  operation  as expenses.

4. Second Category: Modem Corporations

4/1   Stock company

4/1/1  Definition  of a stock company

4/1/1/1    A stock  company  is a company  of which  the capital is  partitioned into equal  units  of tradable  shares  and each shareholder's (co-owner's)  liability  is  limited  to his share in the capital. It is  a form of fi nancing part• nership.  The  rules  of Sharikat  al-'Inan apply to this company  except en the issue of  the limited liability of
the shareholders and the fact that this type of compa•
ny cannot  be unilaterally terminated  by one party or a minority of its shareholders.  [see  items 4/1/2/1  and
4/1/2/9]



338





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah (Musharakah),  and Modern Corporations

4/1/1/2    The stock company has a juristic personality through its incorporation  by law in such a way that it cannot avoid its  obligations  to people  dealing with  it.  This separates   the   liability  of  the   company   from   the liability of its  shareholders  (the  co-owners)  and also establishes for  it a separate legal  capacity  as required for  necessary  legal arrangements,  irrespective of the legal capacity of the shareholders. By definition, a stock company is entitled to initiate legal  claims through  its representative.  It is  subject to the jurisdiction  of the
place of its  incorporation.

4/1/2  Sharf'ah  Rulings relating to a stock  company

4/1/2/1   The  contract  forming  a stock  company  is  binding during   the  duration  designated  by the  artides  of association  for the continuity  of the company on the basis of the undertaking of the parties not to dissolve the company unless the majority of the partners  have consented  to do so.  Therefore,  no one is  entitled  to
dissolve  (to  terminate)   the  company  in  respect  to his shares.  However, a shareho]der is  entitled  to sell his shares or to relinquish  title to them  in favour of another  person.
4/1/2/2    It is  permissible  for the issuer  of shares to add  a certain percentage  to the  actual  value of the  shares  on  the subscription date in order to recover issuing expenses, provided that such percentage is appropriately estimated to reflect the actual expenses incurred.

4/1/2/3    It is permissible to issue new shares in order to increase the capital provided  the new shares are issued  at the fair  value of the  old  shares.  This  should  be  done  in accordance with the opinion of experts in valuation of the company's assets.  In other words,  the new issues can be issued  at a premium  or at a discount  to their nominal value,  or issued at a market value.



339





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corpo rations

4/1/2/4    It is permissible  that a shareholder underwrite  an issue of shares without any consideration. In such a case, there is an agreement between a person and the company on the date of incorporation  of the company, or of a share issue, to the effect that such a person is undertaking  to buy all or part of the shares issued.  In other words, it means  an undertaking  to subscribe  all the remaining shares  that  are not  subscribed  at its nominal  value. However, it is  permissible  for a shareholder  to ask for consideration  for services provided other than the underwriting, such as conducting feasibility studies or marketing  the shares.

4/1/2/5   It  is permissible  that a part  of payment  for subscrip• tion of shares be made  in an instalment  and that the other  instalments  be def erred.  In this case,  the paid instalment  is  a contribution  to  the  Sharikah   capi• tal,  and  the deferral  of some instalments  constitutes an undertaking to increase  his share of capital in the company  subsequently.  This  is permissible  provid• ed the  instalments   cover all the  shares  and  that the company's  liability  is  confined   to  the  value  of the subscribed  shares.
4/1/2/6   It is  not permitted   to purchase  shares using interest• based loans, provided  by either a broker or any other person,  in consideration  for mortgaging  the shares as a security  for payment.

4/1/2/7    I is  not permitted  for someone  to sell  shares  that he does  not  own  and  the  promise  of a broker  to lend the shares to him at the date of delivery does not constitute ownership  or possession of the shares. This is  not allowed especially if the broker  stipulates  that
the  seller  must  pay the price of the  shares  so  that he
can  deposit  it  and  earn  interest  in  return   for  such a loan.



340





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

4/1/2/8   In the legitimate public  interest,  it is  permissible   for the  relevant  authorities to organise  trading  in shares in such a way that  trading  will not take place except through  specific  licensed  stockbrokers.

4/1/2/9    It is  permissible  to restrict the liability of a company to its paid up capital if this is made public, in order to make the customers  of the company  aware of the  financial position  of the  company  without  any  uncertainty  or lack of transparency.

4/1/2/10 It is  permissible  to sell shares in the company  subject to rules  and  regulations  of the  company  that  do not conflict  with  Sharr'ah,  such  as pre-emptive   rights  of the existing shareholders  to purchase  the shares.
4/1/2/11 It  is  permissible  to  mortgage the  company's  shares.
However,  this is  subject  to the rules  and  regulations of the company  vis-~-vis the right of the shareholders to  mortgage   their   ownership  rights   to  undivided shares  in the company.
4/1/2/12It  is  permissible  to  issue  shares  "to  the  order   of"
(nominative  shares).

4/1/2/13It is  permissible to  issue "bearer  shares".  This  is  ex• ecuted  by handing over  to the  investor  a certificate that  represents a right  to shares  in the company  and receiving  their  value  in cash  or acquiring a counter deed  recognising  a debt  against  the  shareholder.  In this  case,  the  common  ownership  of shares  repre• sented  by the certificate is vested in the holder  cf the certificate of shares at any time.
4/1/2/ 14 It is not permitted to issue preference shares, i.e. shares that  have  special  financial  characteristics  that  give them a priori tyatthedateofliquidation cfthe company or at the date of distribution  of profit.  However,  it  is



341





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah),  and Modern  Corporations

permissible to grant certain shares, in addition to being entitled to rights attached to common  shares, certain procedural  and  administrative  privileges,   such  as a right of vote.

4/1/2/15It is not permitted to issue Tamatt' (enjoyment) shares:  shares that entitles the holder  a participation in  the  net  profit,  but  not  to  vote  and  which  are gradually   redeemed   before  the  termination  of the company  through  distribution of profits.

4/2  Joint-liability company

4/2/1  Definition  of Joint-liability  Company

4/2/1/1    A joint-liability company is a form cf personal partner• ship. It is a necessary requirement that this partnership is  publicly declared as a registered company assigned a unique  title (trademark).

4/2/1/2    A joint-liability company has a juristic  personality and independent  financial liability unrelated to the liability of the partners.  Nevertheless,  all the partners  are per• sonally responsible for the obligations and liabilities of the company if the existing assets cannot meet the lia• bilities of the company.

4/2/1/3   In addition  to  maintaining   documents   of the joint• liability company, the partners  are also obliged to maintain commercial  documents  relating to external trade  activities.

4/2/2  Shart'ah  Rulings relating to Joint-liability Companies

4/2/2/1   A creditor  of a joint-liability company  is  entitled  to demand   fulfi lment of all or part  of his  rights  from any of the partners in any way the creditor  deems fit. Therefore,  the creditor  is  not obliged  to claim  such
fulfilment  from the company  first.



342





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

4/2/2/2   The contract of a joint-liability partnership  is not bind• ing;  hence,  a partner  is  entitled to withdraw  from the partnership  on the following conditions:
a)   If the partners did not set a duration for the company..
If they agreed on a duration,  then such duration must
be observed.

b)  The partner  should notify the other partners  of the intention  to withdraw.
c)   If the  unilateral  withdrawal  from  the  partnership would not cause damage to other partners.
4/2/2/3   It is not permissible  for the partner  to bring in a sub• stitute for himself without  the agreement  cf the other partners.

4/3  Partnership in commendum

4/3/1  Defi nition  of partnership  in commendum

4/3/1/1   Partnership in commendum is  a form  of financing partnership. This is because the personality  of the op• erating  partner  is important for the sleeping partner and because there is  a difference  in terms  of determi• nation  of the ownership  of the partners,  whereby the ownership   is   calculated  based  on  disproportionate lots  and not on the basis of proportionate shares  that are equal in number.

4/3/1/2   This form of company. consists of managing  partners and  sleeping  partners.  The  managing   partners  in this partnership are jointly  liable for  the  obligations of the  company.  from  their  personal  wealth  on  the basis of joint-liability.  The  liability  of each sleeping partner  is  limited  to the number  of lots  he owns and
his liability does not extend  to his personal  assets,  It
is permissible  to limit the liability of some investors



343





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

without  any consideration  for limiting  their  liability, in which  case the company  consists of joint-liability partners and partners with limited  liability.  [ see item
4/1/2/9]

4/3/1/3   It  is  not  permissible  for  the  sleeping   partners  to interfere in the operations of the company.  The law does  not even allow that  their  names  be mentioned on the date of the registration of the company.  Only the  funds  collected from  the sleeping  partners are mentioned.

4/3/1/4   The  management of the  company  may be delegated either to one of the joint  liability partners  or to a third party. The sleeping partners  are not entitled to manage the company.

4/3/2  Shari'ah  Rulings relating to the partnership in commendum

4/3/2/1   Profit  must  be distributed  according  to  the  ratio  of lots or agreement.  Losses are borne  by managing  and sleeping shareholders partners, according  to the ratio of their  shares in the capital

4/3/2/2   It is  not  permissible to stipulate  that  a sleeping  part• ner  has  a right  to an amount of profit  according to a particular percentage of the capital or a lump  sum. [see  item  3/1/5/8]

4/4 Company limited  by shares

4/4/1  Defi nition  of a company  limited  by shares

The company limited by shares is a form of personal partnership. The subscription  in this  company  is  in accordance  with equal numbers  of shares  and  it comprises  of managing  partners  and
sleeping partners.

4/4/2  Sharf'ah  Rulings relating to the company  limited  by shares

4/4/2/1   The managing partners in this company are liable for
the obligations  of the  company from  their  personal



344





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (12):  Sharikah (Musharakah),  and Modern Corporations

assets on the basis of joint  liability.  They  are in the position  of a person  who  works  as a Mudarib  and simultaneously  participates  in a partnership. The sleeping  partners' liability  is  limited  to the number of  the shares   each  partner    owns   and   does   not extend  to his own assets. In this case, the liability of sleeping  partners is  equivalent  to that of the capital providers  in a Mudarabah  contract.  It is  permissible to  limit  the  liability  of some  investors  without  any consideration  for  limiting   their  liability,  in  which case the company  consists  of joint  liability partners and partners with limited liability.  [see  item  4/1/2/9]

4/4/2/2   It is  not permissible for the sleeping partners  to inter• fare  in the operations  of the company.  'The  law  does not even allow that their names are mentioned  on the date of the registration of the company.  Only the funds collected from the sleeping partners  are mentioned.
4/4/2/3   The management  of the company  may be delegated either to one of the managing  partners  or to a third party. The sleeping partners are not entitled to manage the company.
4/4/2/4   Profit  must be distributed according to the ratio of par• ticipation or agreement. Losses are borne by the man• aging shareholding partners and sleeping shareholding partners  according to their shares in the capital.  And any excess losses shall be borne by managing partners.

4/4/2/5   It is not permissible  to stipulate that a sleeping part• ner  has a right  to an amount of profit  according  to a particular  percentage  of the capital or a lump  sum.
4/5 Allotment/particular  (Muhassah) partnership

4/5/1  Definition  of allotment  partnership

4/5/1/1  The definition of Sharikat  al-'Inan  is  applicable  to an al•
lotment partnership [see item  3/1].  This type of partner•



345





Sharl'ah  Standard  No. (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah),  and Modern  Corporations

ship belongs to the personal (private)  form of company. The reason for this is  that the partners take into account before concluding a partnership  each ones financial strength  and ability to meet financial obligations  from his personal assets.

4/5/1/2   Sharikat   al-Muhassah  has  no  juristic   personality because  people  other  than  the partners do not know about  it. This partnership does not have any separate financial  liability  as an entity.

4/5/2  Shari'ah  rulings  relating to Muhassah  Company

4/5/2/1  The rulings  for and basis of a Muhassah  company.  do not  differ from  those  for an 'Inan  partnership.  [see item 3/1]

4/5/2/2   The liability of partners  is personal  and,  as such,  they are liable for the liabilities of the company. from their personal  assets.  The rules for and classification of an allotment partnership do not differ from  'Inan  part• nership.
4/5/2/3   The contract of a Muhassah partnership is not binding.
However,  if the  parties  agree to  make  it binding  for a particular  period  of time,  then  they shall be bound by such an agreement.  [see 4/3/2/2]

4/5/2/4   A  partner  in  Sharikat   al-Muhassah  is   entitled   to terminate his partnership  on  condition that  (I) he notifies  other  partners of his intention  to withdraw and  (II) the  unilateral withdrawal  from  partnership would  not cause damage  to other  partners or clients ct the  company.  The  partnership can be liquidated by  way  of actual  or constructive  liquidation  of the company's assets.
5. Diminishing  Musharakah

5/1   Diminishing  Musharakah  is  a form  of partnership  in  which  one of
the  partners promises  to buy.  the equity  share  ct the other  partner



346





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

gradually until the title to the equity  is completely transferred  to him. It is  necessary that this buying and selling should not be  stipulated  in the partnership contract.  In other words,  the buying partner is allowed to give only a promise  to buy. This promise  should  be independent of  the  partnership   contract.  In  addition,  the buying  and  selling agreement  must  be  independent   of the  partnership   contract.  It is not permitted  that  one contract  be  entered  into  as a condition  for concluding the other.

5/2 The general rules for partnerships  must be applied to a diminishing partnership,  especially the rules for Sharikat  al-'Inan.  Therefore,  it  is not permitted  that the contract  of diminishing  partnership  include any clause that gives  any of the parties a right to withdraw  his share in the capital.

5/3 It is not permitted  to stipulate that one partner should bear all the cost ct insurance  or maintenance on the ground  that  he will eventually own the subject matter of the partnership.

5/4  Each partner  should contribute  part of the capital.  The contribution may be in the form  of cash  or tangible assets that can be translated into a monetary value, for example, a land for building or equipment required  for the operation  of partnership.  The loss,  if any. shall   be borne periodically by the parties in accordance with the participation ratio of each partner  as the equity stake of one partner  decreases and the stake of the other partner  increases.

5/5 The ratio  of  profit or income  of the partnership  that  each partner (the Institution and customer) is entitled to should be clearly determined.  However,  it  is  permissible  for the partners  to agree on a ratio of profit sharing that is disproportionate to the ratio of equity ownership. It is  also permissible for the partners  either  to maintain the ratio of profit already: determined even ifthe ratio of equity shares has changed, or to agree on amending  the ratio of profit sharing due to the change  in the ratio  of equity shares.  In doing so,  they: must ensure  that the principle  of allocation of losses  in  accordance  with the ratio of equity  share of ownership  is  maintained.



347





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah   (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corpo rations

5/6  It is not permitted to stipulate  that one partner  has a right to receive a lump  sum out of the profits.  [see  item 3/1/5/8]

5/7  It is permissible for one of the partners  to give a binding promise that entitles the other  partner  to acquire,  on  the basis of a sale contract, his  equity  share  gradually,  according  to the market  value or a price agreed  at the  time  of acquisition.  However,  it  is   not  permitted   to stipulate  that  the equity  share  be acquired  at their  original  or face value,  as this would  constitute  a guarantee  of the value of the equity shares of one partner  (the Institution)  by the other  partner,  which is
prohibited  by Shari'ah.

5/8 The  partners  may arrange  for  the acquisition  of the equity share of the Institution  in a manner  that serves the interests  of both  parties. This  includes,  for  example,  a promise  by the  Institution's  client  to set  aside a portion  ct the profit  or the return  he may earn  from the partnership for the acquisition  of a percentage of the equity of the Institution.   The  subject  matter  of the  partnership  may be  divided into  shares,   in  which  case  the  Institution's   partner   can  purchase a particular   number   ct these  shares  at certain  intervals  until  the
partner   becomes  the  owner  af the  entire  shares  and  consequently becomes the sole owner of the subject  matter of  the partnership.

5/9  It  is permissible  for either of  the partners  to rent or to lease  the share of the other partner  for a specified amount and for whatever duration, in which case each partner  will remain  responsible for the periodical maintenance  of his share on a timely basis.

6.  Date of Issuance  of the Standard

This  Standard was issued  on 4 Rabi' L  1423 A.H., corresponding  to 16  May
2002A.D.













348





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations





Adoption of the Standard


The Sharf'ah Standard on Sharikah (Musharakah) and Modern Corporations was adopted  by the Shari'ah  Board in its  meeting  Na (8) held  in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah on 28 Safar -4 Rabi' I,  1423 A.H., corresponding to 11-16 May
2002A.D.











































349





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (12):  Sharikah (Musharakah),  and Modern Corporations





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (5) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 8-12 Ramadan
1421  A.H.,  Corresponding to 4-8 December  2000 A.D., the Shari'ah  Board decided  to  give  priority   to  the  preparation   of  a  Sharf'ah  Standard   on Sharikah  (Musharakah)  and Modern  Corporations.

On Saturday  15  Dhul-Hajjah   1421   A.H.,  corresponding  to  10  March
200  I  A.D, the  Fatwa  and  Arbitration  Committee   recommended  to  the Shari'ah   Board   the  commissioning  of  a  Shari'ah   consultant   to  prepare a juristic study and an exposure  draft  on the  Shari'ah  Rules for Sharikah (Musharakah)  and Modern  Corporations.

In  its  meeting  held  on  18  Muharram   1422  A.H.,  corresponding  to 12
April  2001  A.D.,  the  Fatwa  and  Arbitration   Committee   discussed   the exposure draft of the Sharf'ah Rules for Sharikah  (Musharakah)  and Modern Corporations  and asked the consultant  to make amendments in light of  the comments  made by  the members.  The Committee  also held a meeting  en
20 Jumada II 1422 A.H., corresponding to 8 September 2001 A.D.  and made some amendments  in light  of the comments  made by the members.

The revised  exposure draft of the Standard was presented to the Shari'ah
Board in its meeting No.  (7) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 9-13 Ramadan
1422 A.H., corresponding  to 24-28 November 2001  A.D.  The Sharf'ah  Board made further amendments to the exposure draft of the standard and decided that it should be distributed  to specialists  and interested parties in order to obtain their comments and discuss them in a public hearing.

A public hearing was held in Bahrain on 29-20 Dhul-Hajjah  1422 A.H., corresponding to 2-3 February  2002 A.D.  The public hearing was attended by  more  than  thirty  participants   representing  central  banks,  institutions,



350





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah),  and Modern  Corporations

accounting firms  Shari'ah  scholars,  academics and others  who are interested in this field. Some of the members  of the Shari'ah Board responded  to the written  comments  that  were sent prior  to the public hearing as well as to the oral comments  that were expressed  in the public hearing.

The Shari'ah Standards  Committee  in its meeting held on 21-22 Dhul• Hajjah 1422  A.H.,  corresponding to 6-7 March 2002 A.D., in the Kingdom of Bahrain  discuss  the  comments   made  about  the  exposure  draft.  The Committee  made  the necessary  amendments,  which  it  deemed  necessary in light of both  the discussions  that took place in the public hearing,  and the written  comments  that were received.

The  Sharl'ah  Board  in its  meeting  No.  (8)  held  on  28 Safar  - 4 Rabi' I,   1423  A.H.,  corresponding to  11-16 May 2002 A.D,, in Al-Madinah   Al Munawwarah  discussed  the amendments made  by the Shari'ah  Standards Committee,   and   made   the necessary   amendments,   which   it   deemed
necessary. Some paragraphs  of the standard were adopted by the unanimous vote of the members  of the Shari'ah Board,  while the other paragraphs  were adopted  by the majority  vote of the members,  as recorded  in the minutes of the Shari'ah  Board.

The Shari'ah Standards Review Committee  reviewed the standard in its meeting  held in Rabi' II 1433  A.H.,  corresponding to March 2012  A.D.  in the  State  of Qatar,  and proposed   after deliberation  a set of amendments (additions,  deletions,  and  rephrasing)   as  deemed   necessary,  and  then submitted  the proposed  amendments to the Shari'ah  Board  for approval as it  deemed  necessary,

In its  meeting No.  ( 41)  held in Al-Madinah  Al Munawwarah,  Kingdom
of Saudi   Arabia  on  27-29  Sha'ban   1436  A.H.,  corresponding  to  14-16
June 2015  A.D.,  the  Shari'ah  Board  discussed  the proposed  amendments submitted  by the Shari'ah  Standards Review Committee.  After deliberation,
the Shari'ah Board approved  necessary amendments, and the standard was adopted  in its current  amended  version.







351





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Permissibility  of Partnership

The  Fuqaha  have classified  partnerships into  four  categories,  namely Sharikat   al-'Inan  (contractual  partnership),  Sharikat   al-Abdan  (skilled trade   partnership),  Sharikat   al-Mufawadah  (agency-like  partnership) and  Sharikat al-Wujuh  (creditworthiness er reputation partnership). The most  important cf all is Sharikat  al- 'Inan  (contractual partnership). The permissibility of this  form  of partnership is  established by the  Qur 'an, the Sunn ah and practical consensus of the Fuqaha.
The permissibility cf Sharikah  is supported by the Saying cf Allah, the Almighty:  {"...And,  verily,  many partners  oppress  one another,  except those who believe and do righteous good deeds,  and they are few..."•

Among  the Sunnah provisions that  support  the permissibility of part• nership  is  the case of AI-Sa'ib  Ibn Abu Al-Sa'ib  Al-Makhzumi  who  was a partner of the Prophet  (peace be  upon  him)  in business  at the beginning of Islam.  On  the  day when  the  Prophet  (peace  be upon  him)  conquered
Mecca,  he met Al-Sa'ib,  then  he (peace  be  upon  him)  said:  "Welcome  my
brother and  my partner.  He jokes  not (i.e.  he  is serious   in  business)  and  do
not argue (unnecessarily),"3

Moreover,  partnership  is  one  of the  main  transactions in all societies since  the advent  cf Islam.  This constitutes,  therefore,  a practical  consensus for the permissibility and validity of partnerships.

The partnerships for which  the jurists  have clarified  their  rules  are the origins  of the modern  corporations,  such  as joint-stock companies  whose

(2)  [Sad:  24]
(3)  The  Hadith  had  been related by Al-Hakim  who deemed  it  authentic   [2:  61].  Al
Dhahabi agreed with A!-Hakim.



352





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah),  and Modern  Corporations

financial  standing  and obligations  are related to the volume  of the shares of the  company  and  on  its  juristic  personality,  not  on the  personality  of the  shareholders.  Therefore,  the  general  rules  for  various  partnerships in  Sharf'ah  will govern   modern   forms   of corporations.  However,  the procedural   systems  relating  to  representation  of partnership   companies and bureaucratic,  administrative   and accounting  procedures  are required by Maslahah  (consideration  of the public good or common  need), which is an acceptable source for  validating  human  actions provided  it is  employed in line with the principles  of Shari'ah.

The general basis  of Sharikah  is  agency (W:akalah)  because each partner is  acting as a principal  partner,  on one hand,  and acting in the  interest  of the partnership,  on the other hand,  as an agent for  the remaining  partners.
Unlike other partnerships,  Sharikat al-Mufawadah combines rules of agency
and guarantee simultaneously.

Conclusion of Sharikah Contract
■ It is  permitted  to conclude  a partnership  contract  with  non-Muslims or conventional banks  for carrying  out permissible  operations  in asso• ciation  with necessary  guarantees  that they will observe Shari'ah pre• cepts  and  principles.  The Sharl'ah basis for this is  the Hadith  stating: "The Messenger  of Allah  has prohibited  concluding partnership  with Jews and  Christians  unless the selling and  buying  is in  the  hands   of the Muslim" The cause of the prohibition  is  the fear of being involved in interest-based   transactions   or in  concluding  impermissible  contracts and this fear is  absent when there are guarantees  to observe and apply
Sharf'ah  rulings.AI Baraka Forum has issued  a resolution  in support of partnership between Islamic  banks and conventional  banks."°
The basis for the permissibility  of an agreement  on amending the terms
of partnership and the profit sharing  ratio is  that this action  does not lead  to  a  possibility  of precluding  a partner   from  getting  a share  of profit."

(4)  Musannaf lbn Abu Shaybah" [6:  9].
(5)  See:  Ibn Qudamah, Al-Mughn," [7:  I10-I11].
(6)  See:  Resolution No.  (9/1):  "Fatawa Nadwat Al Baraka" No.  9,  (P.  151).
(7)  See:  Resolution No.  (11/8):  "Fatawa Nadwat Al Baraka" No.  11,  (P.  194)



353





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Mush arakah ),  and Modern  Corpo rations

Capital  of Sharikah
• The basis for the permissibility that Sharikah  capital  may be contributed in the  form of tangible assets other than cash,  after valuation, is  that the purpose  of Sharikah  is  to give  partners  a right  to use  the  contributed money freely and to share the profit.  This objective is realisable  even if the capital  is contributed  in the form  of tangible assets just  as it is in the case of a contribution  in cash.  Therefore,  it is just as valid to present tangible assets for Sharikah  investment as to present cash. At the liquidation,  each one of the  partners  will be entitled to the equivalent value  of the  assets presented  at the conclusion  of the  Sharikah.""  This  is   the view of the Maliki and the Hanbali scholars."
The basis for the requirement that a payment of contribution to Sharikah capital  in  a  currency   different   from   the  designated  currency   of partnership  must  be  valued  according  to the  current exchange  rate at  the  time  of payment   is that  this  action  is   a currency   exchange between  two  currencies   which  is   permitted  provided   it  is carried out at the current exchange rate.  This is  evidenced  by the Hadith  in which Ibn Umar asked  the Prophet  (peace be upon  him) concerning selling camels  at (a  place  in Medina  called  Al-Baqi')  in a currency and  collecting  payment  in  a different  currency.  The  Prophet  (peace be  upon  him)  endorsed  the transaction   provided  it had  taken  place according  to the current  exchange rate.0
• The  basis  for  the  requirement  that  the investments  of parties  in the
capital  should  be properly  determined  is  that failure to do so will lead to  ambiguity  in  respect  to  the capital.  It is  not permissible  that  the capital  of Sharikah  be  ambiguous  since certainty  as to the  amount  of the capital is a benchmark  for sharing profit.  The equitable distribution of profit is  not possible  if the amount  of capital  contributed  by each party is  ambiguous.(
• The basis  for rejecting  payment  of partnership  capital  in receivables alone is that debts owed to a partner  by another partner  cannot actually be used in partnership  operations,  as they are not assets in possession.

(8)  4!-Mugh" [7:  124]
(9)  "Hashiya AI-Dusuqf" [2:  517];  and "AI-Maughn [5:  17].
( 10)  The source of the Hadith has been stated earlier.
(II) "AL-Mugh" [7:  125].



354





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah),  and Modern  Corporations

Again,  this may potentially lead to Riba wben the partner  is the one in debt.     However,  if the receivables are combined with other assets and the ratio of debt to the total assets is negligible, then debt and the other assets can be presented as a contribution  to partnership  capital. The basis for this is the principle of Tab'iyyah (things dependent  on another  thing) as per the legal maxim: "A  thing whicb in fact follows from another thing follows it also in law and judgment cannot be given separately for a thing that follows from another" and the legal maxim: "The law is flexible  in things that follow from another.
■  The basis for allowing current  accounts  as capital  in partnership  is that,  in spite  of their being considered as loan,  they are presumed to be possessed by the accountholders because the funds are available on demand. This  is because the Institutions are obliged by their regulations and directives  of the supervisory bodies to pay the owner on demand or accept cheques against these accounts irrespective of the financial situation of the Institution.
Managing a Partnership
■  Tbe basis for the right of each partner to participate in the management of the partnership  is tbat partnership  is  based on elements of agency and trust. Tbe element of agency requires that each party be entitled to be involved in the operations in a manner that is  in the interest ct the partnership. The element of trust requires that each party act for the benefit of the partnership."
• Tbe basis for  not allowing a fixed remuneration  for  a  partner  who assists in the management  is  that this may lead to guaranteeing the capital of this partner, or to his not being exposed to risk ofloss,  if any, in proportion  to his contribution  in the capital.
■   The basis for the permissibility  of appointing, by, a separate independent
contract, one partner to manage the partnership and the permissibility of paying him wages is  that the partner  becomes an employee of the company and be is not acting in the capacity of a partner.

(12)  "Hashiyat AI-Dusuqi"  [3:  517]; and "Al-Maughn?" [5:  17].
(13)  See:  41Mughnt" [7:  128].



355





Shari 'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah   (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

Guarantees in Partnership
■  The basis of the requirement  that a partner  is  not liable except in cases of misconduct   or negligence,  and  of the  impermissibility  of a stipu• lation  to  the  effect  that  a partner   guarantees  the  capital  of another partner,  is  that partnership operates  on the basis of trust,  and to hold a trustee  liable for losses  (except  in  the case of misconduct  or negli• gence)  is  impermissible.9
■  The basis for allowing a party to a partnership  to require a guarantee or a mortgage  from another  party as security against cases of misconduct and the like is  that this requirement  does not conflict with the rules for partnership.  Again,  the general principle  cf contracts  and partnerships is that parties are required to observe stipulated terms as far as possible.5
The basis for the permissibility cf a "promise to guarantee" by a third party
whose financial liability is  independent  from the parties to a partnership is  that this action  is  a mere charitable  act and  an  undertaking   that  is independent  of the partnership  contract.  In other words,  a fulfilment  of a promise by a third party is  not a condition  for the permissibility of the
contract. In addition, the third party's guarantee does not adversely affect
the established Shari'ah  principle against guaranteeing  capital or profit. A resolution  was issued  by International   Fiqh Academy in support  of the permissibility  of a third party's promise to guarantee.0
■  The basis for the requirement  that the guaranteeing  Institution  should not  be  the owner of the guaranteed  Institution  or vice versa is  that by ownership the transaction becomes in substance a guarantee by a partner of the capital of another partner,
Outcome  of Partnership  Investment (Profit and  Loss)
■  The basis for  the  impermissibility  of an agreement  to  determine  the profit share on the basis of a lump sum or a percentage  of the capital is because this is inconsistent with the sharing of profit and because profit is not realised unless  the capital is  maintained  intact.

(14)  See:  Ibn  Qudamah,  "Al-Kaf  [2:  230]; and Al-Mubdr  [4:  256].
(15)  See:  Fatwa (I/5)  of Al Baraka  First Forum,  1403  A.H.:  "Qararat  Wa Fatawa Nadwat
Al Barak" (P.  18).
(16)  International  Fiah Academy resolution No.  30 (5/4).



356





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah),  and Modern Corporations

• The basis for the impermissibility of deferring the statement of the profit ratio of each party until  profit  is  realised is  because  such a procedure involves  uncertainty  which  may potentially  lead  to  dispute.  However,
the parties are entitled  to amend the profit ratio or to relinquish  a right
to profit on the date of distribution.  This is  because the profit  belongs to  them;  hence,  it is   permissible  for  them  to  make  amendments   or relinquishments.
■  The basis for the requirement that the profit share may be either pro•
portionate  or disproportionate to the contribution of each party  in the capital is  that  an individual  deserves  a share  in profit  on the basis of the funds  contributed,  the work done  or the  risk borne.  If an indivi•
dual is  involved  in any of these three,  then  it  is  allowed for the parties to agree on a profit ratio accordingly. 'This is  the opinion  of the Hanafi and Hanbali  schools.(7
■  The basis for the  impermissibility  of one party  bearing  losses  or that
each party  bear  a portion  of losses  that  may not  be  proportionate  to the share of each party  in the capital is  the saying of Ali Ibn Abu Talib
(may Allah  be pleased  with  him):  "Profit  distribution is  according  to agreement  of the partners  and loss must be borne  in proportion to the contribution in the capital"  Therefore,  it is a void condition  that one party  should  bear the loss  cf other  parties  and such a condition facili• tates misappropriation  of the property  of others.
■  The basis for the permissibility  cf the partners  agreeing en any method for allocation  of profit,  whether  fixed or variable  during  a particular period, is that this agreement  is circumscribed with a condition  that the
method  adopted  should  not contravene  any Shari'ah  principle,  which
means the method  should not preclude a party from sharing in profit.
• The basis for not allowing final distribution of profit before deduction of expenses and expenditure is that there  is  no profit unless the capital is maintained  intact.

(17)  See: AI-Mirghinani, AIHidayah Sharh AL Bdayah" [3: 7-8], A]-Maktabah Al-Islamiyyah edition; AI-Kasani, 'Bada '?' AI-Sana '1" [6: 62-63]; and Ibn Muflih, Al-Mubdf [5: 4], Al• Maktab Al-Islami edition
(18)  This Athar has been reported by Ibn  Abu  Shaybah in his "Musannaf" [4:  268],  Riyadh:
Maktabat Al-Rushd.



357





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah),  and Modern Corporations

• The  basis  for the  impermissibility of specifying  a lump  sum  profit amount for one partner is that this action is inconsistent with sharing in profit.
The basis for  not allowing a partner  to earn  a share of profit and  a fee
simultaneously  is  that this fee  is  a lump  sum that may preclude  sharing in profit  due  to  the  possibility  that  the  partnership   business  may not realise  enough  profit  to  cover it.  The  basis for allowing  a partner   to receive, based on a separate contract, a fee is that the contract that entitles a partner  to a fee  is not part of the partnership contract  and because this fee is  not inconsistent  with sharing in profit,  as the partner  in this case is considered  to be a third  party.
The  basis  for  the  permissibility  of an  agreement  that  if the  profit
realised is  above a certain ceiling,  the profit over such ceiling belongs to a particular partner,  is  because this constitutes  a valid  condition that  is not inconsistent with profit sharing."Moreover,  the capital provider is  the one who will bear losses,  if any.
• The basis for the permissibility of distributing profit based on construc•
tive valuation  is  that  the use of this method  is  permitted  by Sharf'ah9 and was used in a number  of cases,  such as Zakah and theft.  The basis for the permissibility of constructive valuation  is  also the saying of the
Prophet  (peace be upon him):  lfa co-owner  of a slave frees his part,  the
slave will  be set free  against  his property if he has property;  otherwise, it
will be valued  by fair value and freed.'a
• The  basis for the  permissibility of distributing  funds  to partners on account,  i.e. subject  to settlement and  refund  of any additional profit acquired  over  the  contribution  to  the  capital  on  the  date  of actual liquidation,  is  because  this  action  causes  no  damage   to  any  of the partners since the distributed funds  on account  are subject  to settle• ment  at a later  stage.

(19)  AL-Bahr AI-Zakhkhar" [5:  83],  Dar AI-Kitab Al-Islami  edition.
(20)  See  Resolution  No.  (4)  of the Islamic  Fiqh  Academy under the auspices  of  Muslim
World  League  that was issued   in  the 16  session  held in Mecca on 21-26/10/1422
A.H.;  the International  Islamic Flah Academy  resolution  No.  30 (5/4)  and Fatwa  No. (8/2)  issued during  the A! Baraka's  8 Forum  on Islamic Economics  in Fatawa  Al Baraka" (P.   134).
(21)  This Hadith  has been related  by Muslim,  See:  "Sahih Muslim" [2:  1140].



358





Sharl'ah  Standard  No. (12):  Sharikah (Musharakah),  and Modern Corporations

The basis for allowing distribution of partnership  revenues, including the capital  assets, prior to  liquidation  of the partnership  is  that  the partners suffer no damage from this and also the distribution is subject to review and reimbursement  when liquidation is  actually effected.
Termination of  Partnership
The basis for the rule that termination  of  partnership  will not affect obligations and actions that took place before it is  protection  of the remaining partners against any potential  damage.
The basis for  the impermissibility of a promise by one of the partners
to buy assets of the partnership  at face value is  that  this constitutes a guarantee of the capital which  is prohibited by Shari'ah.  The basis for the permissibility of a promise to buy the assets of partnership  at the market value  is that this does not constitute a guarantee of capital.
Modern Corporations
The permissibility of modern  corporations  is  dependent  on the prin• ciple of Shari'ah that human transactions  are, in principle, permissible (Mu bah)  as  long  as  there is   no clear injunction  against them, espe• cially in view of the fact that the categorisation  of any one or more of these corporations  had parallels in Shari'ah-nominate  contracts, such as Inan partnership, Mudarabah and the like.
Stock Companies
The basis for the permissibility of underwriting issues of shares without taking consideration is that this is an undertaking  that does not involve an impermissible  act,  such as  taking a  commission  for  a guarantee. The International Islamic Fiah Academy has issued a resolution in this respect.9
• The basis for the impermissibility of buying shares using an interest• based loan provided by a stockbroker or other party against a mortgage of the shares is  that this   is an interest-based  transaction  secured by

(22)  See:  International  Islamic Fiqh Academy  Resolution  No.  30 (5/4), and resolution  of Islamic Fiqh  Academy under the auspices of Muslim  World  League during  its  16th session.
(23)  See:  Abdul-Aziz A!-Khayyat,  "A!- Sharikar" [2:  158-159].
(24)  See: The International  Islamic Fiqh Academy Resolution No.  63 (J/7).



359





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah),  and Modern Corporations

shares.   In this  case, both  transactions are prohibited by  an explicit source that indicates that Allah,  the Almighty,  has cursed a person  who lives on interest-based transactions,  a person  who pays such  interest, and a person  who notarises  or acts as a witness for such transactions. The basis for  the impermissibility of selling  shares that  the seller does not  own  is that  this  constitutes  selling  of an item  that  one  does  not own or an involvement  in a transaction without  bearing  a risk which is prohibited by Shari'ah.
• The basis for  allowing a mortgage of shares  is that  mortgaging is  per•
missible.   Moreover,  anything  that  can  be  sold  may  be  presented  as a mortgage as in the case of shares  unless  the bylaws  of the company state otherwise  in which case the conditions stated  must be observed.
+  The basis for the permissibility  of "shares to the order of" (nominative
shares)  is  that  this  is a form  of transf erring  ownership of shares to another   investor.   The  acceptance  by  the  remaining   shareholders   of the  bylaws  of the  company  that  give a  right  to  transfer  is  an implied consent  to the transfer  of ownership. The  basis for  the permissibility
of "bearer shares" is that it is a sale of shares by a shareholder to another
investor.  The acceptance  by the  remaining  shareholders  of the bylaws of the company  that give a right to sell is  an implied consent  to the sale. The fact that the identification  and personality  of the new shareholder (the  purchaser)  is  not known  to other  shareholders  will not affect the sale as they may be provided with this information  if need be.7
• The  basis  for  the  impermissibility  of issuing  pref zrence   (pref 2rred) shares is that pref zrence shares are inconsistent  with profit sharing and involve depriving other  partners  of their  fair share of profit.9
■  The basis for the impermissibility of issuing shares that entitle the holder a participation in the net profit  and entitles  the company  to gradually redeem  the participation through  the distribution of profits before the termination of the company,  is because the funds the certificate holders receive constitute  profit  in  respect  of their  shares.  The claim that  the

{25)  See:  International  Islamic Fiqh  Academy Resolution  No.  63  (1/7). (26)   See:  International  Islamic  Fiqh Academy  Resolution  No.  63  (1/7).
{27)  See:  International  Islamic Fiqh  Academy Resolution  No.  63  (1/7). (28)  See:  International  Islamic  Fiqh  Academy Resolution  No.  63  (1/7).



360





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations

participations are  redeemed  in consideration  for the  distributed  profit is invalid. Therefore, the certificate  holders remain  owners of the shares and are entitled to proceeds  when the company  is  liquidated.
Joint Liability Company
• The basis for  the permissibility of the undertaking  of partners  in a joint liability company  to  be  jointly  responsible  is that  the joint  liability in this way is  subject  to the rules for guarantees.  The permission  granted by  each  of them  to  the others  to  act  on  behalf  of the  company   is subject  to the rules of agency as in the case of Mufawadah  partnership which  combines  elements  ct guarantee and agency.  The partners  have consented to be liable jointly because there is  no gain  at the expense  of any of the partners  and no one is to be cheated.
■  The  basis for the  impermissibility  of bringing  in a substitute partner in a joint liability company  when the other  partners  did consent  to it is that the personality of the partner is significant  for the partners  because the liability ct the company  includes  his personal  assets and the substi• tute may not be in the same fi nancial  position as the partner.
Partnership  in Commendum
• The basis for the impermissibility of sleeping partners of partnership in commendum or company  limited  by shares being  entitled  to interfere in the management of the company  is that  they have agreed not to do so and this agreement  does not affect the rules  of partnership.
■  The  reason   why  the  financial   liability  of  the  sleeping   partners  in partnership in commendum  is  limited  to their  shares  is that  they  are in the position of capital  providers  in a Mudarabah contract.
Allotment (Particular)  Partnership
The basis for  the permissibility  of unilateral  termination  of participation in this kind of partnership  by any of the partners  is  that,  in principle, unilat• eral termination of participation  is  allowed provided  such action  inflicts no damage to any of the partners  as per the saying of the Prophet (peace be upon him}:  "No  harm   to be inflicted and  no reciprocal  harm.'3


(29)  See:  International  Islamic  Fiqh Academy  Resolution  No. 63  (1/7). (30)  See:  Abdul-Aziz  Al-Khayyat,  "A!- Sharikar" [2:  235]
(31)  The Hadith  has been related  by Ibn  Majah  in his Sunan" [2:  784]



361





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah   (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corpo rations

Diminishing Partnership
• The basis for  saying that all the general  rules for partnerships,  especially the rules for 'Inan partnership, are applicable to diminishing partnerships is  to safeguard  this new form  of partnership from becoming  a mere interest-based financing transaction  in which a client undertakes to pay another  party  for his finance  in addition  to a share in the partnership income.
+  The basis for  the impermissibility  of one partner  being responsible  for the expenses of insurance or maintenance  is  that  this condition  is  in conflict with the nature of the partnership  contract.93





































(32)  See:  Fatwa No.  (219)  of the Fatwas of Kuwait Finance  House.



362





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah  (Musharakah ),  and Modern  Corporations





Appendix  (C) Definitions

Contract Partnership  (Sharikat al-'Aqd)

Contract partnership is  an agreement between  two  or  more  parties  to combine  their  assets or to merge their  services or obligations and liabilities with  the aim of making  profit.
Partnership of Ownership  (Sharikat al-Milk)
Partnership  cf ownership   (Sharikat  al-Mille) is  the  combination  cf the assets of two or more persons  in a manner  that creates a state of sharing  the realised  profit  CI  income or benefiting from  an  increase  in the value of the partnership assets. This combination cf assets for making  profit necessitates bearing losses,  if any.  The ownership  partnership  is created by:  events beyond the partners'   control  such as the inheritance  rights  of heirs  in the legacy  of a deceased person. This partnership  is also created by the wish cf the partners such as when two or more parties acquire common  shares in a particular asset.

Mufawadah Partnership

Mufawadah partnership  is  any  partnership  in  which  the  parties   are equal  in all respects,  such  as funds  contributed  by them,  their  right  to act and their  liability,  from  the commencement  of the partnership to the date of its  termination.

Sharecropping Partnership (Muzara'ah)

Sharecropping is partnership  in crops  in which  one party presents  land to another for cultivation and maintenance in consideration for a common defined  share  in the crop.

Irrigating Partnership  (Musaqat)

Irrigating partnership is a partnership that depends on one party presenting designated  plants/trees  that produce  edible fruits to another  in order to work on their irrigation  in consideration for a common  defined  share  in the fruits.



363





Sharl'ah  Standard  No.  (12):  Sharikah (Musharakah),  and Modern Corporations

Agricultural Partnership (Mugharasah)

Agricultural  partnership  is  a partnership   in which  one party  presents a treeless piece of land  to another  to plant trees on it on the condition  that they share  the trees and fruits  in accordance with a defined percentage.

Distribution of Proceeds and Profits

Distribution  of proceeds and profits is  a process of termination  an undi• vided ownership in the company by the final  distribution of the assets where• by  rights  of each partner  are defined and  common  shares  are partitioned into identified  sets  for each partner.  This  is  why distribution  is  defined as identification  of undefined shares  or proceeds of a particular  person.








































364

























Shari'ah Standard No.  (13)



Mudarabah

(Revised Standard)












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        370

I.  Scope of the Standard ..........s os.s o.so . s o .so.oso.so s. o.so . o.so s.s o.oo.. ....          370
2.  Definition d Mudarabah.........................................................................        370
3.  Agreement ofMudarabah  Financing....................................................        370
4.  Mudarabah Contract................................................................................        371
5.  Types d Mudarabah.................................................................................        '512
6.  Guarantees  in a Mudarabah Contract...................................................        '512
7.  Requirements Relating to the Capital....................................................        '512
8.  Rulings and Requirements Relating to Profit.......................................        373
9.  Duties and Powers of the Mudarib........................................................         375
IO.  Liquidation of a Mudarabah Contract...................................................        378
11.  Dated Issuance of the Standard.............................................................        378
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        379
Appendices
Appendix  (a):   Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard.............        380
Appendix  (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard....................................         382
Appendix  (c):   Definitions.............................................................................         389
















367








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE  ALL-MERCIFUL,  THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all his companions





Preface


The aim of this standard  is to explain the Sharf'ah rulings for  restricted and unrestricted Mudarabah, whether the Islamic financial Institution  (Institution/ Institutions)"is  acting in the capacity of a Mudarib  (entrepreneur)  or in  the capacity of an investor.































(I) The word (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer,  in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



369





Shan' ah Standard   No.  (13):  Mudarabah





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard covers Mudarabah  contracts between the Institution  and the other entities or individuals.  It also covers joint  investment  accounts and special purpose  investment  accounts  if these accounts  are administered on the basis of Mudarabah.

The standard  does not cover Sukuk  of Mudarabah  (Mudarabah  Certifi• cates)  or other types of partnership  contracts,  as these are covered by sep• arate standards.

2. Definition of Mudarabah

Mudarabah  is  a partnership  in profit whereby one party provides capital
(Rab  al-Mal) and the other party provides labour  (Mudarib).

3. Agreement  of Mudarabah Financing

3/1   It is  permissible,  on the basis of a general  framework   or a memo• randum  of understanding, to conclude  Mudarabah financing  con• tracts for a particular  sum of money and within a particular  defined duration  provided  that the memorandum of understanding will be later  implemented  in line with  specific  or  successive  Mudarabah transactions.

3/2  The memorandum of understanding should define the general con• tractual  framework,  indicating  the  intention   of the  parties  to  use either  unrestricted or  restricted  Mudarabah   financing  instrument, either through  revolving transactions  or separate transactions.  Also, the memorandum of understanding should indicate the profit ratio, and  type of guarantees  that  shall be presented  by the  Mudarib  to cover situations  of negligence, misconduct  or breach of contract  and other  relevant issues in this regard.



370





Shari' ah Standard No (13):  Mudarabah

3/3  If the Mudarabah contract  is  actually concluded  on the basis of the memorandum of understanding, the contents  of the memorandum become an integral part of any future contract, unless the parties  had originally agreed to exempt  themselves  from some of the obligations mentioned therein.

4. Mudarabah Contract

4/1  The  Mudarabah  contract  may be  concluded   using  terms  such  as
Mudarabah,  Qirad  or Mu'amalah.

4/2  Both  parties  should  possess the legal  capacity to appoint  agents and accept agency. Therefore, a Mudarabah contract may not be concluded in the absence cf two contracting parties with absolute legal  capacity or  of their  agents  who  enjoy  legal  capacity  similar  to  that  cf the contracting parties.

4/3  The general principle is  that a Mudarabah  contract  is  not binding, i.e. each ct the contracting  parties  may terminate  it unilaterally  except in two cases:

4/3/1  When  the  Mudarib  has already  commenced the  business,  in which  case the  Mudarabah  contract  becomes  binding  up  to the date of actual or constructive liquidation.

4/3/2 When the contracting parties agree to determine a duration  for which  the contract will remain  in operation.  In this case,  the contract  cannot  be  terminated prior  to the  end  of the  desig•
nated duration, except by mutual agreement  of the contracting
parties.

4/4  A Mudarabah contract  is one of the trust-based contracts. Therefore, the Mudarib  is investing Mudarabah capital on a trust basis in which case the  Mudarib   is  not  liable  for  losses  except  in case of breach of the  requirements of trust,  such  as misconduct  in  respect  to  the Mudarabah  fund,  negligence  and breach of the terms of Mudarabah contract.  In committing  any of these,  the  Mudarib  becomes  liable
for the amount of the Mudarabah  capital.



371





Shari'ah Standard No (13):  Mudarabah

5. Types of Mudarabah

Mudarabah contracts are divided into unrestricted and restricted Muda•
rabah.

5/1  An unrestricted Mudarabah contract is a contract in which the capital provider permits the Mudarib to administer a Mudarabah fund without any restrictions. In this case, the Mudarib has a wide range of  trade or business freedom on the basis of trust and the business expertise he has acquired.  An example of unrestricted Mudarabah is when the capital provider says, "Do business according to your expertise.  However, such  unrestricted business freedom in an unrestricted  Mudarabah must be exercised only in accordance with the interests of the parties and the objectives of the Mudarabah contract, which is  making profit. Therefore, the actions of the Mudarib must be in accordance with the business customs relating to the Mudarabah operations:  the subject matter of the contract.

5/2 A restricted Mudarabah  contract is  a contract in which the capital provider restricts the actions of the Mudarib to a particular location or to a particular type of investment as the capital provider considers appropriate, but not in a manner  that would unduly constrain the Mudarib in his operations.

6. Guarantees in a Mudarabah  Contract

The capital provider is permitted to obtain guarantees from the Mudarib that are adequate and enforceable.  This  is circumscribed by a condition that the capital provider will not enforce these guarantees except in cases of misconduct, negligence or breach of contract on the part of Mudarib.

7. Requirements Relating to the Capital

7/1  In principle,  the capital  of Mudarabah  must  be  provided  in the form of cash.  However,  it  may  be presented in the form of tangible assets,  in which case the value of the assets is  the contribution  to the Mudarabah  capital.  The valuation of the assets may be conducted by experts or as agreed upon by the contracting parties.



372





Shart'ah Standard  No.  (13):  Mudarabah

7/2  The capital of Mudarabah  should be clearly known to the contracting parties and defined in terms of quality and quantity in a manner  that eliminates  any possibility of uncertainty  or ambiguity.
7/3 It is  not permissible  to use a debt owed by the Mudarib  or another party to the capital provider  as capital in a Mudarabah contract.

7/4  For a Mudarabah   contract  to  be  valid  and  for  the  Mudarib  to  be considered  as  having  control  over the  capital,  the  capital  must  be, wholly or partially, put at the disposal of the Mudarib, or the Mudarib must have free access to the capital.

8. Rulings And Requirements  Relating to Profit

8/ 1    It is  a requirement that  the mechanism  for distributing  profit must be  clearly known  in a manner  that  eliminates  uncertainty and  any possibility of dispute.  The distribution of profit must be on the basis ct an agreed percentage  ct the profit and not on the basis of a lump sum  or a percentage  of the capital.

8/2  In principle,  it is  not permissible  to  earn  a share  of profit  in addi• tion  to a fe in a Mudarabah contract.  However,  it  is  permissible for the two parties  to construct a separate  agreement independent of the  Mudarabah  contract  assigning  one  party  to  perform,   for a fze, a business  activity  that  is not  by custom  part  of Mudarabah operations.  'The  independence of  this  separate  agreement  means that if the contract  of providing  this activity is terminated,  this will
not affect the contract of Mudarabah.

8/3 The parties shall agree on the  ratio of profit  distribution  when the contract  is  concluded.  It  is also permissible  for the parties to change the ratio of distribution  of profit at any time and to define the duration fer which the agreement will remain valid.
8/4   Ifthe  parties did not stipulate the ratio of profit distribution, then they shall  refer  to  customary   practice,  if any,  to  determine   the  shares of profit.  If the  customary  practice  is  that  the  profit  is  distributed equally,  then  this will be  applied  as such.  If there  is  no customary practice  in  this  regard,  the  Mudarabah  contract   is  regarded  void



373





Shari'ah Standard No (13):  Mudarabah

ab  initio,  and  the  party  who  acts  as the  Mudarib   should  receive a common market  price for the kind and amount of services  that he provided  as Mudarib.

8/5  If one of the parties stipulates  that  he should  receive  a lump  sum of money,  the  Mudarabah  contract shall  be void.  This  rule  does  not apply to a situation  where the parties agree that  if the profit  is  over a particular ceiling  then  one cl the  parties will take the  additional profit and if the profit is below or equal to the amount  of the ceiling the distribution of profit will be in accordance  with their agreement.

8/6 It is not permissible for the capital provider to give the Mudarib  two amounts  of capitals  on condition  that  the  profit  earned  on one  of the two amounts  would  be taken  by the  Mudarib  while the capital provider  would take the profit earned  on the other  amount.  It is  not also permissible  for the  capital  provider  to  state  that  the  profit  of one fi nancial period  would be taken  by the Mudarib  and the capital provider   would  take  the  profit  cf the  following  financial   period. Similarly, it is  not permissible  to assign the profit from  a particular transaction to the Mudarib  and the profit from  another  transaction to the capital provider.
8/7  No  profit  can  be  recognised   or  claimed  unless  the  capital  of the Mudarabah is maintained intact. Whenever a Mudarabah operation incurs  losses,  such losses  stand to be compensated  by the profits of future  operations   cf the  Mudarabah.  The  losses  brought   forward should  be  set against  the  future  profits.  All in all,  the  distribution af profit  depends   on the  final  result  of the  operations  at  the  time of liquidation of the Mudarabah contract.  If losses are greater  than profits  at the  time  of liquidation,  the  balance  (net  loss)  must  be deducted from the capital.  In this case, as he is a trustee  the Mudarib is  not liable for the amount  of this loss, unless there  is  negligence  or misconduct on his part.  If the total  Mudarabah expenses  are equal to the total Mudarabah revenues, the capital provider  will receive his capital back without  either profit  CI  loss,  and there will  be no profit in which  the  Mudarib   is  entitled  to  a share.  If profit  is   realised,  it must be distributed between  the parties  as  per the agreement.



374





Sharl'ah  Standard No (13):  Mudarabah

8/8  The Mudarib  is  entitled  to a share of profit as soon as it is clear that the operations  of the Mudarabah  have led to the realisation of a profit. However, this entitlement is  not absolute, as it is subject to the retention of interim profits for the protection  of the capital.  It will be an absolute right only after distribution, i.e. when actual or constructive valuations take place.  It is  permissible  to distribute  the realised profit among the parties  on account, in which case the distribution  will be revised when actual or constructive  valuation  takes place.  The final  distribution  of profit  should  be made based  on the selling price  of the Mudarabah assets,  which is  known as actual valuation.  It is  also permissible  that the profit be distributed  on the basis  cf constructive  valuation,  which is  valuation cf the assets on the basis cf fair value.  Receivables shall be measured  at the cash equivalent,  or net realisable value,  i.e.  after the deduction  of a provision fer doubtful debts. In  measuring  receivables, neither  time value  (interest  rate)  nor  discount  on current  value for extension  of period  of payment shall be taken into consideration.

8/9  If the Mudarib  has commingled his own funds with the Mudarabah funds,  the Mudarib  becomes  a partner in respect  of his funds  and a Mudarib  in respect  of the funds of the capital provider.  The profit earned on the two commingled funds will be divided proportionately
to the amounts  of the mo funds,  in which  case the Mudarib  takes
the profit  attributable to his own funds,  while the remaining profit is  to be distributed between  the Mudarib  and  the capital  provider according  to the provisions  of the Mudarabah contract.
9. Duties and Powers  cf the Mudarib

The Mudarib  should  employ his best efforts to accomplish  the objectives of the  Mudarabah  contract.  The  Mudarib   should   assure  the  capital provider  that  his money  is  in good  hands  that  will act to find  the best ways  of investing  it  in a permissible manner.

9/1  If a Mudarabah contract  is  concluded   on an unrestricted basis, the Mudarib  is permitted, in general, to do what entrepreneurs do in his field of activity, including  the following:



375





Shart'ah Standard  No.  (13):  Mudarabah

9/1/1  Attending  to all permissible  investment  or trading  fields that are  feasible,  given the  amount  of the  capital  at his disposal, and in which  he believes that his expertise,  and technical  and professional qualifications are likely to give  him the ability to compete effectively.

9/1/2  Carrying out the work himself or appointing another person to carry out some work if necessary, such as buying a commodity or marketing it for him.

9/1/3  Choosing as far as possible appropriate  places  and markets that are seemingly free of risks.

9/1/4 Safeguarding the Mudarabah  funds or depositing them  in the custody of a trustworthy  person whenever appropriate.

9/1/5  Selling  and buying on a deferred payment  basis.

9/1/6  The Mudarib  may do, either by permission or appointment  of
the capital provider,  the following:

a) The  Mudarib   may, at  any  time,  combine   a Mudarabah contract  and a partnership  (Sharikah)  contract, irrespective of whether  this takes place   at the outset of the contract  or after the commencement  of Mudarabah  operations, and of whether  the partnership  contribution  is  from  the Mudarib
himself or from  a third  party. The mixture of unrestricted
investment  deposits  with the Institutions'  funds is an exa•
mple of this kind of combination.

b) The  Mudarib   may  accept  funds  from  a  third   party  on a Mudarabah   basis if this new contract will not affect his investment  and  management   responsibility  in respect  of the first Mudarabah  contract.
9/2  It is permissible for the capital provider,  on the basis of his interests, to place restrictions on the actions  of the Mudarib. Thus,  Mudarabah operations may be restricted  to a specified time and place,  so that the Mudarib  may only  invest the Mudarabah  funds during  a particular
time period  or in  a specified country  or in  a market  of a particular



376





Shart'ah Standard  No.  (13):  Mudarabah

country.  In addition,  the  Mudarabah   operations   may be  restricted to investment  in certain  sectors  such as services or trade  sectors  or a single commodity or a group of commodities.  However, restricting the Mudarabah  operations  to certain  commodities is  circumscribed with a condition  that such commodities must be commonly  available so that,  other  things  being  equal,  the  restriction   will not  prevent the objectives of the Mudarabah  contract from being achieved.  For example,  the  commodities  to  which  the  Mudarabah   is  restricted
must  not be scarce,  seasonal  (and  out  of season)  or in  very.  limited
supply with  the consequence   that the objectives of the  Mudarabah contract  cannot  be achieved.

9/3  The capital provider  is  not permitted  to stipulate  that he has a right to  work  with  the  entrepreneur  (Mudarib)   and  to  be  involved   in
selling and  buying  activities,  or supplying  and  ordering.  However, the  Mudarib   should  refer  to  him  in  performing  any action  and should  not  act without  consulting  him.  Also,  the  capital  provider is  not entitled  to lay  down  conditions   that will restrict  movements or actions  of the  Mudarib,  such  as a stipulation  that  the  Mudarib must  enter  into  a  partnership with  others  or a stipulation  that  the Mudarib  must mix his  personal  funds  with the Mudarabah  funds.
9/4 The Mudarib  must  carry  out  all the work that  any similar  asset or fund  manager  would  be  liable,  by  custom,  to  do.  In this  case,  the Mudarib  is  not  entitled  to  a fe for  this  work  as this  is  part  of his
responsibilities.  If the Mudarib  appoints  another  party  on an Ijarah (hiring  contract)   basis  to  carry out  such  work,  the  wages for  the worker  must  be  paid from  the  personal  funds  of the  Mudarib  and
not from the Mudarabah   funds.  The Mudarib  may hire against the account of Mudarabah  funds  another  party,  at the prevailing  rate, to execute work that is not by custom the responsibility  of the Mudarib.

9/5  The Mudarib is not entitled to sell items for the Mudarabah  operation at  less  than the  common   or market  price,  or to  buy items  for  the Mudarabah  operation  at a price higher  than common  prices, unless ifsuch  action in either case is intended  to achieve an objective that is
obviously in the interest of the Mudarabah.



377





Shart'ah Standard No (13):  Mudarabah

9/6  It is  not  permissible for  the  Mudarib to  make  a loan  or  a gift or a charitable donation out  of the  Mudarabah funds.  Likewise,  the Mudarib is not  entitled to waive  a right  associated with  the  Mu• darabah operation unless  the  capital  provider has consented to his doing  so.

9/7  If the  Mudarib  has  a  right   to  receive  living  expenses  from  the Mudarabah  funds  that  has been  approved by the  capital  provider, then  he is entitled to the amount so approved for him.  If there  is  no agreement on this, then  the Mudarib should  take living expenses  in accordance with custom  and reason. The Mudarib is also entitled to
travelling expenses in accordance  with custom  and  reason.

10. Liquidation of a Mudarabah Contract

10/1  A Mudarabah contract can be liquidated in the following manner:

10/1/1  Being  a non-binding contract, it can be liquidated by uni• lateral  termination of the  contract by one  of the  parties. [see  item 4/3]

10/1/2  With  the agreement of both  parties.

10/1/3  On the date of  maturity if the two parties  had earlier agreed to set a time limit for it.  [see  item  3/4]

10/1/4  When the funds ofMudarabah contract  have been exhausted
or have suffered losses.

10/ 1/5  The death of the Mudarib or the liquidation of the institution that  acts as Mudarib.

10/2  On the  maturity of a Mudarabah operation,  the assets  should  be liquidated  in the manner explained  in item  8/8.
11. Date  of  Issuance of  the Standard

This Standard was issued on 4 Rabi' I,  1424 A.H.,  corresponding to 16
May 2002 A.D.







378





Shart' ah Standard  No  (13):  Mudara bah





Adoption of the Standard


The  Sharf'ah  Standard   on  Mudarabah   was  adopted   by  the  Shari'ah Board  in its  meeting  No.  (8)  held in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah   during the period  of 28  Safar to 4 Rabi' I,  1423  A.H.,  corresponding to 11-16  May
2002A.D.











































379





Shan'ah Standard No (13):  Mudarabah





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In  its  meeting  No.   (5)   held  in  Makkah  Al-Mukarramah  during  the period  of 8-12  Ramadan  1421  A.H.,  corresponding  to 4-8 December  200l A.D,,  the  Shari'ah   Board  decided  to  give priority  to  the  preparation   of a Shari'ah  Standard  on Mudarabah.

On Saturday 15 Dhul-Hajjah  1421 A.H., corresponding to 10 March 2001
A.D., the Fatwa and Arbitration Committee  recommended to the Shari'ah Board  the  commissioning  of a Shari'ah  consultant   to  prepare  a juristic study and an exposure  draft on the Shari'ah Standard  for Mudarabah.

In  its   meeting  held  on  18   Muharram    1422  A.H.,   corresponding  to
12   April  2001   A.D.,   the  Fatwa  and  Arbitration   Committee   discussed the  exposure  draft  of the  Shari'ah  Rules for  Mudarabah   and  asked  the consultant  to  make  amendments   in light  of the  comments  made  by  the members.  The Committee  also held a meeting on 20  Jumada II,  1422  A.H., corresponding to 8 December  2001  A.D., and made some amend!ments in light of the comments  made by the members.

The revised exposure draft of the Standard  was presented  to the Shari'.ah Board  in  its  7th  meeting  held  in  Makkah  Al-Mukarramah  during   the period  of 9-13  Ramadan   1422  A.H.,  corresponding  to  24-28  November
2001  A.D. The Shari'ah Board made  further  amendments to the exposure draft of the Standard  and decided that it should be distributed  to specialists and interested  parties  in order to obtain their comments  with the objective of discussing them  in  a public hearing.

A public hearing  was held in Bahrain  during  the period  of 29-20 Dhul•
Hajj ah  1422  A.H.,  corresponding  to  2-3  February  2002  A.D. The public



380





Shart'ah Standard No (13):  Mudarabah

hearing was attended  by more than  thirty participants  representing central Institutions,  Institutions,  accounting   firms,  Shari'ah  scholars,  academics and  others  who  are interested  in this  field.  Some  of the  members  of  the Shari'ah  Board  responded  to the written  comments  that were sent prior  to the public hearing  as well as to the oral comments  that were expressed  in the public hearing.

The Shari'ah  Standards  Committee  in its meeting held during the period of 21-22  Dhul-Hajjah   1422  A.H.,  corresponding  to 6-7 March  2002 A.D, in the Kingdom  of Bahrain discussed  the comments  made on the exposure draft. The Committee  made the amendments which it considered necessary in light  of both  the discussions  that had taken  place in the public hearing and the written  comments  that had been received.
The Shari'ah Board in its 8th meeting held on 28 Safar-4 Rabi' I, 1423 A.H., corresponding to  11-16 May 2002 A.D, in Al-Madinah   Al-Munawwarah discussed  the  amendments  made  by  the  Shari'ah  Standards  Committee, and made  the necessary  amendments,  which  it  deemed  necessary.  Some paragraphs   of the  standard   were  adopted  by  the unanimous  vote of the members  of the Sharf'ah  Board,  while the other  paragraphs  were adopted by  the  majority  vote of the  members,  as recorded  in the  minutes  of the Shari'ah  Board.

The Shari'ah Standards Review Committee  reviewed the Standard in its meeting  held on Rabr'  II,  1433  A.H.,  corresponding to March  2012  A.D., in the State of Qatar, and proposed  after deliberation  a set  of amendments (additions,  deletions,  and   rephrasing)   as   deemed   necessary,  and  then submitted  the proposed  amendments to the Shari'ah  Board for approval as it deemed  necessary.

In its 41st meeting  held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah, Kingdom  of Saudi Arabia during  the period  of27-29 Sha'ban  1436 A.H., corresponding to  14-16   June   2015   A.D.,   the  Shari'ah   Board  discussed   the  proposed
amendments  submitted   by  the  Shari'.ah   Standards  Review  Committee.
After  deliberation,  the Shari'ah  Board  approved  necessary  amendments, and the Standard  was adopted  in  its  current amended  version.



381





Shan'ah Standard No (13): Mudarabah





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Permissibility  of Mudarabah and Its Rationale
Mudarabah,  known also as Qirad,  is  a contract  that arranges cooperation in business investment between capital on one hand and entrepreneurship on the other,  whereby the contracting parties jointly and commonly own the realised profit as per the agreement.  The party  providing the capital is   known  Rab al-Mal  and  the  investor  is   known  as Mudarib  or  'Amil (literally.  worker) or Muqarid.
Mudarabah contract  derives its permissibility from  the following:
a)  From  the  Qur'an  is  the Saying  of Allah,  the Almighty:  {"Others travelling through the land, seeking of Allah's  bounty}."  This verse is   interpreted  to mean  those  who  travel  for the  purpose   of trading and  seeking  permissible   income  in order  to provide  for themselves and their family.
b) From  the  Sunnah   is   the  Hadith   that  says,   "AI-'Abbas   Ibn  Abdul•
Muttalib  used  to pay money  for  Mudarabah   and  to stipulate  to  the Mudarib  that  he  should  not travel by sea, pass by valleys or trade  in livestock,  and  that  the  Mudarib  would  be liable for  any  losses  if he did so.  These  conditions  were brought  before  the Prophet  (peace be upon  him)  and  he approved  them?"  Among  the  Hadiths  regarding
the permissibility of Mudarabah  is  the case that states that "Umar Ibn

(2)  AI-Marghinani,  AlHidayah  Sharh Bidayat Al-Mubtad£" [3:  202];  Al-Kasani, "Bada'f' Al-Sana i" [6:   56 and 57]  Ibn  Rushd,  Bidayat  Al-Mujtahid"  [2:   236];  and bn Qudamah, Al-Maughn£" [3:  26].
(3)  "Takmtlat Al-Majmw" [14:  357-360];  "Subul Al- Salam" [3:  76];  "Bidayat Al-Mujtahid"°
[2:  236]  41-Hdayah"  [2:  202];   "AL-Maughnr  [5:  26]  and  41-Muhadhdhab"  Printed
with  41-Majm" [14:  357].
(4)  [A!-Muzzammil (The One Wrapped in Garments): 20]
(5)  The Hadith  has been related by Al-Bayhaqi  6:  111].



382





Shari' ah Standard  No (13): Mudarabah

Al-Khattab  gave one  man  the funds  belonging  to  an orphan  for the purpose  of Mudarabah  and the man was  trading  with these funds  in Iraq"."
c)   Ibn Al-Mundhir mentioned that there is generally  consensus  among the scholars in respect to the permissibility of a Mudarabah contract."
• The   rationale  for   making   this   contract  permissible  includes   the following:
a) Money  cannot   increase  unless  it  is   associated  with  work.  It is also not permissible to provide  money in return  for a periodic  pre-agreed payment   (rent)  to  a person   who  is  willing  to  invest  it  as this  will constitute a debt with Riba.
b) The Mudarabah contract  is  made permissible to facilitate investment cooperation between capital providers  who are not prepared to invest and manage their money themselves, and competent business or investment experts who lack adequate  capital.  In other  words,  there
are some  individuals who  are rich  but lack business  or investment
know-how and  others  who  have  business  or investment  expertise but  lack  money.  This  situation  thus  calls for  the  permissibility  of the  Mudarabah contract so as to combine  the  interests  of the  two parties.""

Moreover,  a Mudarabah contract  is  an instrument that was commonly used in trade  and which usage expanded  in modern  times to include  busi• ness,  services,  and agricultural  or horticultural and industrial activities.
a) The business philosophy of conventional ban.ks depends on the concept of renting  out  money  and  making  profit  in doing  so,  while   Shari'ah prohibits  this  philosophy  because  of its  being  Riha.  The  Mudarabah financing instrument  has been an essential instrument  to develop Islamic financial Institutions (Institution/Institutions). This instrument is used by  these  institutions  to  attract  unrestricted   or restricted  investment accounts and to reinvest these funds in various activities.

(6)  The Hadith  has been related by AI-Bayhaqi in A/-Marfah (see: Al-Zayla'i,  "Nash Al•
Rayah').
(7)  "AI-Maughn"  [7:  133-134].
(8)  "Takmtlat  Al-Majmu"  [14:  371].



383





Shart'ah Standard  No.  (13): Mudarabah

Contract of Mudarabah
The basis for  the rule that both  parties  to a Mudarabah  contract  must be legally  capable to appoint,  or act as,  an agent is because each party acts as an agent of the other party  and appoints  the other  party  to act on his behalf. The entitlement  to appoint or act as an agent entitles one to conclude  a Mudarabah  contract.
■  The basis for regarding  a Mudarabah   contract  initially as a non-bin• ding contract  is  that the Mudarib  is  using the capital provider's  funds with his consent  in a contractual  relationship  in which the Mudarib  is just  an agent,  and an agency contract  is  not binding.
■  The basis for making a Mudarabah  contract  binding  once the work has
commenced  is  that a unilateral  termination of the contract  at this  stage might  frustrate  the objective of the  parties  to make  profit  and might cause damage to the Mudarib  since he might  not receive any compen• sation for his work.
■  The basis  for allowing a time  limit for the operation  <fa Mudarabah
contract  is that a Mudarabah  contract is, in essence, an agency contract, which  is   subject  to  a designated  duration"  The  International  Fiqh Academy has issued a resolution  in this respect.
The basis for considering  the Mudarib  as a trustee  with respect to the
Mudarabah  funds is  that the Mudarib  is using another  person's money with his consent,  and  the  Mudarib  and  the  owner  of the  funds  share the benefits from the use of the funds.  In principle, a trustee  should not be held liable for losses sustained by the funds.  Rather, the risks of such losses must be borne by the Mudarabah  funds.
Guarantees in a Mudarabah Contract
■  The basis for allowing guarantees  in a Mudarabah  that would be used in  case of misconduct  and  negligence  of the  Mudarib  is  that  in such a case the  Mudarib  then  becomes  liable for losses  and  must  bear the consequences  of these actions.{

(9)  41-Mughr" [7:  133-134].
(10}  ResolutionNo.122  [5:  13]
(11)  This  is the opinion of the Shari'ah Board of Al Rajhi  Company, see Al-Mudhakkirah
Al- Tafsiriyya. I is also endorsed  in the First Al Baraka Forum.



384





Shan'ah Standard  No  (13):  Mudarabah

Requirements  Relating to the Capital
• The basis for  it  being  permissible that  the  capital  of Mudarabah  may be constituted  by the  value of tangible  assets contributed  is  that  the objective of Mudarabah is to make profit. This objective can be realised whether  the capital is contributed in the form of tangible assets or cash. This  rule is based on the view of the Maliki and the Hanbali jurists.3
■  The basis for the requirement that the capital of Mudarabah   should be
clearly known  and should  be defined  in terms  of quality and quantity in a manner  that eliminates  any possibility of uncertainty or ambiguity is  because  recognition   of profit  is  dependent  on the  recovery  of the capital on the date of liquidation.  However,  recovery of the capital  can• not be ascertained if its  amount  was not known earlier, and this lack of
knowledge  may potentially  lead  to a dispute.
• The basis for not allowing  a debt  owed by the Mudarib to the capital provider be contributed ascapital in a Mudarabah contract is because, as  a  principle,  Mudarabah  capital   must   be  (at  the  conclusion  of a Mudarabah contract)  an asset that  is  available  and cannot be used
on the  spot  for the Mudarabah operations. A debt  fails to meet  this requirement,  as it is  a receivable  that  is  not  available  for  use when the  contract is  concluded.  Moreover,  considering a debt  as capital of Mudarabah involves  potential Riba. This  is  because  the  creditor may be suspected  of having  extended the debt  tenure  in order  to get additional consideration (for the extension) from  the debtor  under
the name  ofMudarabah.
■  The basis for the  requirement that  the Mudarabah  operation   is  valid only if the capital is presented  to the Mudarib  is because the Mudarib  is the manager  ct the Mudarabah  operation,  and the trustworthy trustee for the Mudarabah   capital and  income.  Therefore,  it  is  necessary  that the capital  be fully released  to the  Mudarib  so that  he will be able  to
protect and invest the capital and achieve the objective of the Mudarabah
contract.

(12)  "Hashiyat AL-Dusual [3:  517];  and  Al-Maughn"" [5:  17]. (13)  AL-Hidayah" [3:  203]  and "Hashiyat AI-Dusuqt"  [3:  517].



385





Shart'ah Standard  No.  (13):  Mudarabah

Rules and Requirements Relating  to Profit
• The basis for the requirement  that the profit ratio is  known  is  because profit  is   the  subject  matter  of a Mudarabah   contract  and  a lack  of knowledge as to the subject matter  renders a contract  void.
The  basis for  the  requirement that  the  profit  share of each  party be
a percentage  of the profit and not a lump  sum is  because a Mudarabah contract  is  a form  of partnership for sharing profit.  Any condition  that allocates a lump  sum  to  one party  would  not  be consistent  with  the sharing  of profit.  This  is  because  the  Mudarabah   operation  may not realise a profit other than the lump sum which goes to one party, thus excluding the other party from partnership in profit.
■  The basis for the impermissibility of simultaneously  receiving a share of profit and a fee  for  managing  a Mudarabah   is  likewise that the fee is  provided  in the form of a lump  sum  and the Mudarabah  operation may not realise a profit other  than  the lump  sum,  thus precluding  the sharing of profit.
The basis for the permissibility  of an agreement  to change the ratio of profit distribution  at any time is  that the profit is  a right belonging  to the parties  and  an agreement  in the  manner  described  does not lead to a prohibited  act, such  as preclusion of sharing in profit. Rather, the agreement  makes the parties  partners  in profit.
■  The  basis  for  nullifying  a  Mudarabah   contract   when  the  contract is  silent on  the  ratio of profit distribution   and there  is   no customary practice according  to which the profit is  to be distributed  to each party is  that the subject matter of a Mudarabah  contract  is  profit. The lack of knowledge as  to the subject matter nullifies contracts.
■  The  basis for  nullifying  a Mudarabah  contract   when  one  party  sti• pulates  entitlement to a lump sum is because  a Mudarabah is  about sharing  profit  and this form  of condition precludes  sharing  of profit and  may potentially lead  to one party  being wrongfully  deprived of his rights.

(14)  See:  AI Baraka's  1I  Forum,  Fatwa No.  (8); AI Baraka's 4 Forum,  Fatwa  No.  (5). This is also  seconded   by the  Fatwa  of the  Sharf'ah  Board  of Faisal  Islamic   Bank, Sudan (P.   107),  which   was  published in  "Dall Al-Fatawa  Al-Shar'iyyah F AI-Amal Al Masr afiyya,  Islamic  Economic  Centre,  International  Islamic  Bank, (P.  53).



386





Shari'ah Standard  No  (13):  Mudarabah

The basis for not  allowing an agreement that  the Mudarib  be entitled to the profit earned on one of two capital funds,  while the profit earned on the other  capital fund  belongs  to the capital provider,  is that such an agreement  may preclude  the sharing  of profit and  may potentially lead  to one party being wrongfully deprived  of his rights.
The  basis  for  stating  that  profit  is  not  realised  unless  the  capital  is
recovered or maintained intact is the Hadith in which the Prophet (peace be  upon  him)  said:   "The  instance  of a Musali  (a person who performs prayer)  is that of a businessperson  who  will not secure profit unless  the capital  is  secured.    Likewise,  a supererogatory prayer  is  not  acceptable
unless  the  obligatory prayer  is  performed.U   This Hadith  shows  that distribution  of profit  prior  to  recovery  of the  capital,  or  unless  the capital is  maintained  intact, is  invalid. Moreover, profit is  an addition  to the capital and such an addition  cannot be recognised or realised unless the capital that is  the source of the profit is  maintained.
■  The basis for the requirement that the Mudarib  is  preliminarily  entit• led to a profit when realised, i.e. prior to distribution (an encumbrance right), and that the net profit earned will be known absolutely only after allocation through  actual or constructive valuation, is  analogous to the contract  of sharecropping.  The Mecca based Islamic Fiqh Academy has issued  a resolution  in support of constructive  valuation. G
Duties  and Powers ct the Mudarib
The basis for allowing the Mudarib freedom of action in an unrestricted Mudarabah  is  that the Mudarib  has the aim of achieving the objective of the capital provider,  which is  making  profit,  and this  is  not possible unless the capital is vigorously put into operation.
• The basis  for not  allowing the capital  provider  to stipulate  a right  to work with the entrepreneur  (Mudarib)  or to be involved  in acts relating to Mudarabah  operations  is  because  such a stipulation  would  curtail

(15)  The Hadith has been related by Al-Bayhaqi in his Sunan,  and was narrated  by Ali bn Abu Talib. Al-Bayhaqi stated that there is a weak narrator  in the chain of transmission of this Hadith,  Al-Maws'ah Al-Fiqhiyyah" [38:  74].
(16)  Resolution  No. (4) of the Islamic Fiqgh Academy under the auspices of  Muslim World
League issued in the sixth session that was held in Mecca. This is also the view that  was endorsed  by Al Baraka's 8 Forum, Fatwa No. (2).



387





Shart'ah Standard  No.  (13):  Mudarabah

the  freedom  of the  Mudarib,  limit the  investment  scope  and  hinder the Mudarib in achieving the objective of the Mudarabah contract,  i.e. making profit.
• The basis for not allowing the Mudarib to make a loan,  gift or charitable
donation  from  the Mudarabah  fund is  because these  actions  do not benefit the Mudarabah  operation, rather, they involve  potential  lass to the capital  provider.
• The basis  for  allowing the Mudarib,  when acting in the interest of the
Mudarabah and in the event that the parties did not specify an amount of money for expenses, to obtain personal expenses from the Mudarabah funds as per customary  practice   is because what is  known  by custom is  deemed  to  apply   as  a condition  even if the  parties did  not  clearly stipulate it. Again, the permission  for the Mudarib to obtain  common personal expenses in these cases is  granted by custom.
Liquidation  of Mudarabah Contract
• The basis for allowing liquidation  of a Mudarabah   contract  unilate• rally or by agreement  of the parties  or at the maturity  date is  because a Mudarabah  contract  is   non-binding   if the parties  did  not stipulate
a term for its  maturity.
The basis  for allowing constructive  valuation  is  because Shari'ah  has endorsed  the concept of valuation.  In addition,  this is  allowed because it is  a valid tool that passes rights to owners appropriately. The actual valuation of assets for distribution  is based on a common  sense because this is  the principle.
The  basis  for allowing  a Mudarabah   contract  be terminated   on  the grounds  of loss of capital  is  that  when  the capital  has  been lost, the Mudarib is  not able  to put it to work in a business,  and that the fund that was assigned  for the Mudarabah  is no longer in existence, thus entailing  the termination of the Mudarabah contract.
The basis for allowing termination  of a Mudarabah  contract  due to the
death of the Mudarib is that a Mudarabah contract is similar to contract of agency Or,  at least, it includes agency and an agency contract  is  ter• minable  by the death of the agent.



388





Shan'ah Standard No.  (13):  Mudarabah





Appendix (C)
Definitions


Sharikah

Sharikah  is an agreement  between  two or more  parties  to merge  their assets or to combine  their services,  obligations  and liabilities with the aim of making  profit.

A Mudarabah contract is distinguished from a Sharikah  (Musharakah)
contract  in the following  respects:

a) The basis for earning a share of profit in Sharikah  is the required capital contribution  of all parties, whether  in the form of cash, commodities, services or liability in the case ct reputation  partnership and that the subject of the contract  is  based on a single element,  i.e.  capital.  The basis for earning  a profit  in a Mudarabah, on the other  hand, comes from  two elements:  the  first element  is  the existence  of capital  that is  subject  to,  and  similar  to, the  conditions   of Sharikah  capital;  the second  element  is  the  work  done  by  the  Mudarib  that  is  different from  the capital of the venture.
b) In Sharikah,  the work,  as a general  rule,  is  to be done jointly  by the parties,  whereas  in Mudarabah it  is  the Mudarib  who works.


















389


























Shari'ah  Standard No.  (14)



Documentary Credit


(Revised Standard)












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        396

I.  Scope of the Standard ............so. sos«s o s.s o.sso .s o.ss. sos.so s . s o..o ....                     396
2.  Definition, Types and Characteristics of: Documentary Credit .........        396
3. Shari'ah   Ruling on Documentary Credit..............................................        399

4.  Date cf Issuance of the Standard............................................................        405
Adoption cl the Standard......................................................................        406
Appendices
Appendix (a)   Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard.............       407
Appendix (b):  Ihe Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard..............ca......         410
Appendix (c):   Definitions.............................................................................         415




























393








IN  THE NAME OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all  the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all  his companions





Preface


The purpose  of this standard  is  to  define documentary  credits, their characteristics, Shari'ah rules and regulations so as to facilitate transactions in them by the Islamic financial Institutions  (Institution/Institutions).0

































(1) The  word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



395





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit





Statement of the Standard


I. Scope of the Standard

This standard  covers documentary  credit extended  by  an Institution, either on the basis of client orders or for the use of the institution itself including all types and forms  of documentary  credit, the various  stages of their execution  and the relationships created between the parties to the transaction.

2.Definition, Types and Characteristics of Documentary Credit

2/1  Definition of documentary credit

A documentary credit is  a written undertaking  by a bank (known as the issuer)  given to the seller (the beneficiary) as per the buyer's (applicant's or orderer's) instruction or is  issued by the bank for its own use, undertaking  to pay up to a specified amount (in cash or through  acceptance or discounting  of a bill  of exchange),  within a certain period of time,  on condition that the seller presents docu• ments for the goods conforming  to the instructions.

In brief, a documentary credit is an undertaking by a bank to pay sub•
ject to conformity of the documents to the contractual instructions.

2/2  Procedural stages of documentary credit

2/2/1  The stage of concluding a credit contract: This stage precedes credit,  and the contract  concluded  is  usually a sale contract in which the seller stipulates that the price be paid through documentary  credit,  however,  the  contract  may be a lease contract,  agency with commission  or any other contract.

2/2/2 The stage of requesting the opening of credit:  At this stage the buyer requests the bank to open the credit   so that the seller can be notified.



396





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary   Credit

2/2/3 The stage of issuing credit and notifying the seller: At this stage, the bank  issues  and sends  the letter  of documentary credit  to the buyer, either directly or through an intermediary bank.

2/2/4 The stage of executing  the credit:  At this stage, the beneficiary presents the documents stipulated  in the letter of credit  to the bank. The bank examines  them  in accordance with the  credit conditions. Ifthe documents conform to instructions, the bank accepts them, executes the credit and delivers the documents to the buyer,  in case it is  not the institution  itself,  after the receipt of partial  or  full payment  of the  value  or  receives  a deed  ct commitment to pay on the date of maturity so that the buyer is able to receive the goods  represented by the documents.  If the documents do not conform to instructions, the  bank reserves the right to accept, reject or seek amendment of the documents.

2/2/5  Coverage by correspondents:  If more than  one bank participate in the execution of credit, the accounts  are settled in accordance with the terms of coverage agreed upon between the banks.

2/3  Types of documentary credit

2/3/1  Basic classification

Documentary  credit  is  classified,   according to  the  strength ct the undertaking into two types;  namely  (I) revocable  cred• it,  which  can  be  amended   or  cancelled   without   consulting the beneficiary, and (II) irrevocable  credit, which cannot be amended or cancelled  without  the consent  of the parties.

2/3/3  Other  classifications

There  are other classifications of documentary  credit. 'These include  the following:
Transf rable documentary credit: This credit entitles the benefi• ciary to request  the executing  bank to make the credit available, partially  or totally,  to another  beneficiary  or beneficiaries.
Back-to-back  credit, which means the credit issued is guaranteed
by another  credit.



397





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit

■ Revolving or renewable  credit, which  means  the beneficiary  can repeatedly  submit new documents for new operations within the limits of the credit amount  and during  its permissibility.
• Red clause or advance payment  credit whereby the bank is allowed
to pay a certain  percentage  of the credit before submission  of the documents, against  an undertaking by  the  beneficiary  to repay that amount  ifthe goods are not shipped or the beneficiary fiks to
use the credit during the period of its permissibility. Such payment may be made against a letter of guarantee  from the beneficiary.
• Import and export  credit  (depending on the issuing bank).
■ Local and foreign  credit.
Confirmed and non-confirmed  credits.
Partial shipment  and a non-partial  shipment credit.
On sight or immediate payment credit,  deferred payment cred•
it,  acceptance credit  and negotiable credit.
• Syndicated  credit   (partnership  credit),  which   describes  the state of participation by more  than  one bank  due  to the  huge amount   of credit  granted with  each bank  providing a letter  of guarantee, to the extent  of its participation, to the leading bank.
• Standby credit  (guarantee  credit).  This credit  resembles  letters of guarantee with  a clause  that  payment  is  conditional  upon beneficiary's (in  this case the contractor's)  failure  to perform.
2/4 Characteristics  of documentary credit

2/4/1  Dealing  in documentary credit takes place on the basis of the documents alone and is executed without reference to the goods. Documentary credit,  in essence.  makes  it binding  for the bank to execute the credit whenever  the beneficiary presents,  within the  duration  of the  validity  of the  contract,  the  documents required by the credit and conforming to the instructions.

2/4/2  Opening  of credit  by the  buyer  (orderer),  though   it  may  be acted upon  with certainty,  is  not considered  a final payment  of the price of the goods. The buyer remains  liable for the payment
until  the  bank  pays  the value  of the  documents,  however.  the



398





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary   Credit

seller (beneficiary)  does not have  a right  to request  payment from the buyer as long  as the credit subsists and  is valid.  If the credit expires before the submission of the documents,  the seller has the right to claim payment directly from the buyer, because expiry of the credit in itself does not amount  to revocation  of the sale contract.
2/4/3 The bank is  obliged to pay the value of the credit  to the ben• eficiary when the latter presents  the documents  that conform to  instructions,  except upon  proof of fraud  or forgery  of the documents,  or in the case of a court decision declaring the sale contract  null and void.

2/4/4 Interpretation   of the  duties  and obligations  of the  parties  to documentary credit  are subject  to International   Commercial Terms  (INCOTERMS  2000) and  the  Uniform  Customs  and Practices for  Documentary Credit  (UCP  500)  when reference is  made to INCOTERMS in the sale contract  and to UCP in documentary credit.
3. Shari'ah  Ruling  on Documentary Credit

3/1   Permissibility of documentary credit

3/1/1  Dealing  in documentary   credit  includes  agency for  providing procedural  services,  the most important  of which is  the exam• ination of documents,  and the provision of institutional guaran• tee to the importer. As both agency and guarantee contracts are permissible, documentary  credit becomes permissible subject to the conditions stipulated  in this standard.

3/1/2  Opening  of all  types  of documentary   credit,  its  issuance  and confirmation, on the basis of the client's order or for the institution itself,  are permitted  to  an Institution.  It  is  also permissible  to
an institution to participate, or play an intermediary role, in such dealings and to notify,,  amend or execute in any way such credit, either for its own use or on behalf of another institution  or bank, according  to  the  available  forms  of executing  documentary credit,  subject to item  (3/1/3)  below.



399





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary Credit

3/1/3  It is not permissible for the institution  to undertake transactions in documentary   credit,  in accordance  with  what  is  stated  in item  (3/1/2),  either for  itself or on  behalf of another as a client or  institution   or  by  way of collaboration,  when  such  credit
pertains  to goods that are prohibited by the Sharf'ah,  or is based on a contract that is  void or irregular (according to the Shari'ah) due to vitiating conditions  or includes interest, either charged
or paid,  whether explicitly as in the case of loan upon payment by the beneficiary of amounts  not fully or partially covered in similar credit, or impliedly,  as in the case of discounts or trading (payment) on bills of exchange with deferred and delayed payments.

It is  stipulated  for  the permissibility  of the  subject  of docu• mentary  credit that the contract  upon which reliance is placed be a contract  that  is  valid  in the  Shari'ah  insofar  as  its  ele• ments,  conditions  and type  of transaction,  whether  currency exchange,  ordinary  sale or  another,  are concerned,  and  also with respect  to its specific additional  conditions.
3/1/4  The  bank is  obliged  to  execute the  credit  when  it  conforms to instructions,  except upon  proof of fraud  or forgery of the documents,  in which case it  is  under  no obligation  to execute it.  Provided  that  if the  contract concluded  prior  to opening of documentary  credit  is nullified  by a court  decision,  the execution of the credit is  subject to a new agreement.

3/2 The contract preceding the opening of credit

3/2/1   It  is permissible for the seller to stipulate in the sale contract that payment  be made through  documentary  credit. Such  a  condi• tion is valid and its  performance  is  binding upon the buyer

3/2/2 It   is   permissible  to  secure  international  transactions  using documentary  credit  provided  that  the  secured  transactions do not violate the rules of the Shari'ah.



400





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit

3/2/3 When    the   contract   stipulates    that   its   interpretation   is subject  to INCOTERMS   (issue 2000) or the  United  Nation's Convention  in respect  of the International sale of goods  or any other  reference, then such potential  interpretation is circumscribed with  a condition   that  it  must  not  violate  the rules of the Shari'ah.  [see  item  3/2/2]

3/3  Commissions and expenses  in documentary credit

3/3/1  It is  permissible for the institution to charge actual  expenses incurred in issuing  documentary credit. It is  also permissible for the  institution  to charge  a fe for providing  the required services,  whether  such a fee  is  in the form  of  a lump  sum  or a certain  percentage of the credit  amount, provided  that the duration  of the  credit  is   not  considered in determining the commission.  This  rule applies  to services  rendered  for both import  and  export  credit,  except where  the  amendment in• volves  a rescheduling of the duration  ct the credit  facility.  It is, therefore, permissible for the institution to charge only the actual  expenses  incurred,  in which  case it will be a definite sum and not a percentage.

The Institution  must abide  by the following conditions:

a) The aspect ct guarantee per se must not be taken into account when  estimating  fees  for  documentary  credit.  Accordingly, it  is  not permissible  for  an institution  to charge an amount in  addition  to  the  actual  expenses  incurred   if  it   endorses a credit  facility issued  by,  another  bank,  because  endorsing a credit  facility is  an addition  over guarantee.  The  rule for endorsement   applies  to  participation   in  the issuance  and endorsement   ct credit  as  well as  issuance  of standby  credit
(guarantee  credit),  as long  as services or obligations  are  not
required.

b )The issuance  of a credit facility should not involve  Riba bear•
ing profits or become a means for such profits.



401





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit

c)  It  is  not  permissible  to use a combination   of contracts  in documentary credit as an excuse for involvement in the prohibited  transactions,  such  as taking  a commission   for providing a guarantee  or extending  a loan.

3/3/2 The  rule  of item  3/3/1  above equally applies to  receiving  or payment   of  commissions   and  expenses  and  in  a  situation where the institution  acts as an intermediary in these respects, irrespective of whether  the transaction  is between  the institu• tion  and its client (the orderer  or beneficiary)  or between  the institution  and other institutions  and banks.

3/3/3  The  ruling  of commission  for  providing  letters  of guarantee that was stated in the Shari'ah Standard  No.  (5) on Guarantees must be applied when determining commissions  fer the letters ct guarantee   that  accompany  documentary  credits,  such  as letters  of guarantee  provided  in the case of advance  payment of a portion  of the  amount  or the  shipping  guarantee  that  is issued  for releasing the goods before the arrival of documents.

3/4  Guarantees in documentary credits

3/4/1  It   is   permissible  for  the  institution  to  secure  the obligations arising out of documentary  credit,  or to provide documentary credit as security for payment in favour of institutions and banks dealing with it.  The institution  may act  as an intermediary for facilitating documentary  credit using other permissible and acceptable   forms  of guarantee.   It is,  therefore   permissible to  use  a number  ct means  as a cover for  documentary   credit including  cash,  freezing of permissible accounts and negotiable instruments valid according to the Shari'ah, certificates ct shares in real estate and withholding  the documents  cf the credit that stand  for the goods.

The  cover  of a documentary  credit  may  be  also  one  of the following: a transferable letter of credit; a back-to-back  letter of credit;  a letter of guarantee issued by the bank of the beneficiary



402





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit

against  the advance  payment  in  case  of advanced  payment credits;   a  letter  of guarantee  issued   by  a  bank participating in the issuance  or confirmation  of the credit;  relinquishment receivables and commercial papers, such as bill of exchange and promissory  notes.  This item  must be read together  with item
3/4/2 below.

3/4/2 It is not permissible for the institution  to accept the following types of guarantees:  interest-based  bonds,  shares of companies that deal in prohibited activities, and interest-based receivables. It is also  not  permissible   for the  institution   to provide  any of these  guarantees  as  security   for  its  obligation   to  other institutions or banks or to act as an intermediary to facilitate such guarantees.

3/4/3 I is  permissible  for  the  institution  and  the  applicant   for documentary credit to agree on investing the cash cover of the credit in accordance  with Mudarabah  partnership.

3/5 Murabahah transactions in documentary credit

When  a client intends to purchase  imported  goods from the institu• tion through  Murabahah   financing of the documentary credit,  the following must be observed:

3/5/1  Opening   of  documentary   credit  should   not  precede   the conclusion  of the sale contract  between  the  orderer  and  the beneficiary   (the  seller)  irrespective  of  the  orderer  having taken  possession  of the goods  that  are the subject-matter  of the contract.
3/5/2 Institution  should   be  the  party   who  purchases   from  the supplier,   and  then  sells  to  the  client  through   Murabahah as per the rulings stated in Shari'ah Standard  No. (8) on Murabahah,  while taking  into  account  item  2/2/2  in respect to cancellation  of contract  and item  3/1/3  in respect to agency in Murabahah.



403





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit

3/6 Musharakah contract with the client to finance  documentary credit for imported goods
3/6/1  In case the institution signs  a partnership contract with  the client  to purchase goods  prior  to the opening of credit  and before the client concludes a sale contract with the supplier, it is permissible to open the credit in the name of either partner. It is  permissible for the institution,  after receipt  of the goods, to  sell  its share  to  a third   party or  to  its partner through a spot or deferred payment Murabahah on the condition that the sale to the partner is not based  on an earlier  exchange  of binding promises or stipulated  in the Musharakah contract.

3/6/2 It is permissible  for the institution  to sign a partnership contract with the client in respect cf goods  purchased  by the client on the  condition that  the institution  does not sell  its  share to the client on a def zrred payment  basis.

3/7 General rules

3/7/1  If the credit transaction  includes a provision  that it  is subject to the prevalent  principles  and practices  that unify documentary credit,  it  is   necessary   to  qualify  such  a  statement   with  the stipulation  that it will not violate Shari'ah rules and principles.  It is  pref arable that the institution presents alternatives  that could be agreed upon between the institution  and the correspondent banks.

It is a requirement to explicitly state that a provision stipulating interest  will not be acted upon,  and  also for trading  activities that   contravene  the provisions   of  the   Shari'ah.   For  valid substitutes. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (17) on Commercial Papers,  items  5/2 and 5/3)

3/7/2  It is  not permissible for  the  institution  to  discount   accepted bills cf exchange,  i.e.  to purchase  these bills before maturity at less than  their  nominal  value.



404





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit

3/7/3  It is not permissible  for the institution  to trade in deferred pay• ment documents  or accepted bills of exchange, i.e.  to purchase these  instruments at less  than  their  nominal  value.  It is also not  permissible  for the institution   to act as an intermediary, whether  by payment  or notification,  between  the beneficiary and the issuing or confirming  bank to facilitate such dealings.

3/7/4 It is not permissible for the institution  to negotiate, for less than their  nominal  value,  documents  payable on  sight  or  payable bills of exchange.
3/7/5  It  is   not  permissible  for  the institution,  as far as possible,  to present  bills of exchange that  it  undertakes  to  pay  LO    clients whose debts to the institution  are  represented by these bills,  so as to get them discounted by other banks that may accept them.

3/7/6 The  institution   should  arrange  its  relationships   with  other institutions   and  correspondent  banks  on  the  basis  of non• payment  of interest  and  avoidance  of prohibited transactions with respect to covering operations  between the correspondent banks  when  such  relationships   involve  settlement   of inter• bank obligations resulting from documentary credit and other banking  operations.

4. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued  on 7 Rabi' I,  1424  A.H., corresponding to 8 May
2003A.D.


















405





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit





Adoption of the Standard


The  Sharf'ah  Standard  on  Documentary  Credits  was adopted   by  the Shari'ah Board in its meeting No (10) held in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah during  the  period  of 2-7 Rabi  I,   1424  A.H.,  corresponding to  3-8 May
2003 A.D.











































406





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its  meeting  No.  (5)  held   in  Makkah Al-Mukarramah   during  the period of 8-12 Ramadan 1421  A.H., corresponding  to 4-8 December 2000
A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Board resolved to give  priority  to the preparation  ct
a Shari'ah Standard on Documentary Credit.

On  Monday 29 Ramadan  1421  A.H.,  corresponding  to 25 December
2000 A.D.,  a Shari'ah  consultant was commissioned  to prepare a Shari'ah study and an exposure draft.

In its meeting held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 15 and 16  Safar  1422
A.H.,  corresponding  to 9 and  10  May 200 I  A.D.,  the  Shari'ah Studies Committee  discussed  the  juristic  study  of the  standard  and  requested the consultant  to  incorporate  the necessary amendments  in the light ct the conclusions  ct the Committee and the observations of members.  The Committee also discussed the exposure draft in its  10th  meeting held  in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 14 Rabi'  I,  1422 A.H.,  corresponding to 6 June
2001  A.D.,  and made some amendments to the exposure draft.

In its meeting No.  (II}  held  in Jordan  on 18  and  19  Jumada  II,  1422
A.H., corresponding  to 6-7 September 200I  A.D, the  committee further discussed the exposure draft of the standard and  made amendments  that were deemed necessary in preparation of the submission to Shari'ah Board.
The revised exposure draft of the standard was presented to the Shari'ah
Board  in  its  8th  meeting  held  in  Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah from 28
Safar to 4 Rabi' I,  1423  A.H.,  corresponding  to 1116  May 2002  A.D. The Shari'ah  Board  made  further  amendments   to  the  exposure  draft and decided to defer its discussion in the public hearing until views crystallize



407





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit

on the  issue  of the  contract that is relied  upon  for documentary credit  in the context  of the deferment  of its two counter-values,  known  as Ta 'jil  al• Badalayn.

The  revised  exposure   draft  of the  standard   was also presented  to  the Shari'ah  Board  in its 9th meeting held in Makkah  Al-Mukrramah during the period  of 11-16 Ramadan  1423 A.H., corresponding to 16-21  November
2002 A.D. The Shari'ah  Board made  further  amendments to the exposure draft and decided  that it should  be distributed to specialists and interested parties  in order  to obtain  their  comments  in preparation  of its discussion in a public hearing.

A public hearing  in Bahrain  on 18  Dhul-Hajjah  1423  A.H.,  correspond• ing to  19  February  2003 A.D. The  public  hearing  was attended  by more than thirty  participants representing central  banks, institutions, accounting firms,  Shari'ah  scholars,  academics  and  others  interested in the field.  The members  of the Shari'ah Standards  Committees (1)  and  (2),  responded  to the written  comments that were sent prior to the public hearing  as well as to the oral comments  that were expressed  in the public hearing.

The Shari'ah  Standards  Committees (1)  and (2) held  a joint  meeting on
2 Muharram  1424  A.H.,  corresponding to 5 March  2003 A.D.,  to discuss the  comments  that  were  made  during  the  public  hearing   as well  as the observations received in writing. The two  committees made  amendments that were deemed  suitable.

The Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. (10) held in Al-Madinah Al• Munawwarah during  the period  of 2-7 Rabi' I,   1424  A.H.,  corresponding to  3-8 May 2003 A.D.,  discussed  the  amendments made  by the  Shari'ah Standards Committee, and incorporated the amendments deemed  suitable. The Shari'.ah  Board unanimously adopted  some of the items of the standard and some  items  were adopted  by the majority  vote of the  members  of the Shari'ah  Board,  as recorded  in  the minutes  of the meetings  of the Shari'ah Board.

The Shari'ah Standards Review Committee reviewed  the standard in its meeting  held  rn  Rabi' II,  1433  A.H., corresponding to March  2012  A.D., in the State of Qatar, and proposed after deliberation a set of amendments



408





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit

(additions,  deletions,  and   rephrasing)  as  deemed   necessary,   and  then submitted the  proposed  amendments to the  Shari'ah  Board  for  approval as it deemed  necessary.

In its meeting No.  (41)  held in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah, Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia during the period of27-29 Sha'ban  1436 A.H., corresponding  to
14-16 June 2015 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed the proposed amendments submitted  by the Shari'ah  Standards Review Committee.  After deliberation, the Shari'ah Board approved  necessary  amendments, and the  standard  was adopted in its  current  amended  version.











































409





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary Credit





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Permissibility  of Documentary  Credit
The permissibility of documentary  credit is  based on the principle that it  relies upon contracts  that are  valid according to the Shari'ah, such as Kafalah (personal guarantee),  Wakalah (agency contract) and Qard (loan).

Shari'ah Categorization  of Documentary  Credit
The basis for the permissibility of irrevocable documentary credit is a combination  of a contract  of guarantee and agency. 'Tb  these two the Qard (loan)  transaction  is to be added.  It derives  permissibility from  the contract  of mortgage  (Rahn)  as  well, because  it  secures payment.  The contract of guarantee  creates a liability for payment, while agency determines  the performance of acts relating  to oper• ations such as communication  of the credit notification  and initia• tion of operations  pertaining  to follow-up and examination  of doc• ument. 'The loan element comes into operation when the institution pays on behalf of the client  in case of documentary credit  that  is totally or partially uncovered.
■  The basis fer the permissibility of  a revocable  documentary credit is  that
it is  a form of agency contract that is  permitted by the Shari'ah.  When a third party's right  is attached to it, it becomes binding, and this occurs when  it  leads  to  acceptance or  payment.  A revocable  documentary credit cannot  be  classified  under  the  contract  of guarantee  for two reasons;  namely (I) it conflicts with the requirements of guarantee; and (II)  an option is not permissible in guarantee contracts.
+  The basis for  the permissibility of the undertaking  of the confirming bank and other similar undertakings  of the banks that participate  in

(2)  Resolution  No.  (419)  of  the Shar'ah  Board  of the Al Rajhi  Banking  Corporation  and
Investment  and Answer  No.  (71)  of the Shari'ah  advisor of Dallah Al Baraka
(3)  Ibn  Qudamah,  A! Sharh Al-Kabir",  [3:  59-60],  1951  A.D.



410





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary Credit

issuance or confirmation  of the credit is that it is an act of back up guar•
antee,  which is permissible in the Shari'ah."
The  basis of permissibility  of guarantee  in  irrevocable  credit  being qualified  from  the  perspective  of execution  with  the  condition  that documents  presented conform  to the conditions stipulated,  is the ruling of the  jurists  that  Kafalah (guarantee)   accepts qualification  through a stipulated condition.6
The  basis  for  the  ruling  that  documentary  credit  terminates   with
implementation or expiry is that the guarantee  for documentary credit is limited  in time by a period,  and this is the period  of validity of the credit. It is  permitted to place a time frame on guarantee."
■  The  basis for  the  permissibility  ct the  contract  relied  upon  for  doc•
umentary  credit, as well  as  its conditions,  is  that  it is  a sale  for which security is provided through  guarantee, and this is  compatible with the objectives of the contract.
Contract That  Precedes  the Opening of Credit
• The  basis for the permissibility ct making  opening  ct documentary credit a condition  in the sale contract preceding  documentary credit is that such a condition  is similar to a stipulation  to provide a specific guarantor   for  payment,  which  is  a valid condition  acknowledged  as an interest  for the contract. (
• The  basis  for  the  permissibility   of undertaking  international  sale contracts  and their  security through documentary credit is that upon examination, the international sale contracts that are secured through documentary  credit  pose  a difficulty:  Do they  involve  delay of the
two counter-values  that  is prohibited by the Shari'ah?

(4)  Ibid.,  [13:  25-26]  Ah' AI-Din   AI- Samarqandi, "Tuhfat AI-Fuqaha", [3: 407]
(5)  Ibn  Abidin,  "Radd AL-Muwhtar  'Ala  AL-Durr Al-Mukhtar",  [4:  265], Beirut:  Dar Ihya'
AI-Turath Al'Arabi, n.d.
(6)  Ibid. (P.  265).  Ibn Qudamah, "ANSharh Al-Kabir", [13:  25-26];  AI-Samarqandi,  "Thfat
Al-Fuqaha",  [3:  402, 404 and 405]; Muhammad Al-Hajjar,   "Fath Al-Allam  Bi-Sharl Murshid Al-Anam    Al-Figh  'Ala  Madhhab Al-Sadah Al-Shaf'iyyah",  [5:  43],  Beirut: Dar Ibn Ham,  1418  A.H.
(7)  See: Wizarat Al- Awqaf A!-Kuwaytiyyah, "Al-Maws~h AI- Fighiyyah, letter "Ra", "Bay"
"Bay'  Wa Shart",  Para (28)  AI- Samarqandi,  "Thfat  AI-Fuqaha",  [2:  70].  Mustafa Ahmad Al-Zarqa,  AI-Madkhal AL-Fiqhi Al-Amm,  1986,  (pp.  477-478);  Muhammad AL-Hajjar,  "Fath AI-Allam",  [5:  19]



411





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary Credit

The members of the Board differed on this into those who prohibit them due to the cause indicated, and those who permit them -being in a majority with those permitting them disagreeing on the following points:
a) That these contracts -prior to the ascertainment of the goods- do not involve delay in the two counter-values rather they amount to bilateral promises, which are agreements to sell and do not amount to sale itself.
b) That they merely amount to extension of the session of the contract (Majlis  al- 4qd),  with  respect  to the agreement,  up to  the time of ascertainment  of the goods.
c) That they do not amount to a delay in the mu counter-values, but they are permitted on the basis of general need.
d)That  they are,  ab initio,  an exchange of a debt for a debt and this is
permitted under the Shari'ah
e) That  the contract preceding  the opening  ct documentary credit amounts to a sale contingent upon the opening of credit.
f) That these contracts do not involve delay in counter-values, because that  is  attained  through  a stipulation  for  delay,  while there  is  no stipulation of delay in this case.

Commissions and Expenses in Documentary Credit
The  basis  for  the  impermissibility of  receiving  compensation  for guarantee for the aspect related to documentary credit is that a guarantee is preparatory to extending a loan, and this is not to be compensated. The four Fiqh schools are unanimous on the impermissibility of taking compensation for  guarantee.  This  rule is  endorsed  by a resolution of the International Islamic Fiqh Academy," a ruling of the Shari'ah Supervisory  Board  of the  Faysal  Islamic  Bank  of  Sudan,"  the Shari'ah  Board of Al Rajhi  Banking  Corporation for Investment9 and a resolution  of the Shari'ah  Fatwa and Supervisory Board of the Kuwait Finance House.

(8)  International  Islamic  Fiqh Academy  Resolution  Na.  12(12/2).
(9)  Fatwa  No.  (14)  of the Sharf'ah  Supervisory  Board  of  the Faisal  Islamic  Bank, Sudan. (10)  Resolution No. (297) af the Fatwas  af the Shari'ah Supervisory Board of Kuwait Finance
House.



412





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary Credit

The   basis   for   the   permissibility   of  receiving   compensation   for an agency-related  service  in documentary  credit,  whether  in a lump sum or as a percentage of a known amount, is that the amount is in lieu of services rendered by the institution, in its capacity as an agent of the client.  The majority of the Fuqaha upheld the permissibility  of charging wages for agency.(  The  Sharf'ah  Supervisory Board of Al Rajhi Banking Corporation  for  Investment has passed a resolution  permitting  receipt
ct payment including the services involved  in documentary  credit  with•
out referring to the aspect of guarantee.3
• The basis for the impermissibility  of charging commissions  in consid• eration for providing long or short term loans, discounting and trading (payment  of the  value)   in documents and  def zrred  payment  bills of exchange or for providing  facility, are the texts of the Qur 'an  and the Sunnah  laying down the prohibition  of Riba.3
Guarantees in Documentary Credit
■  The  basis  for  the  permissibility  ct seeking  guarantees  explained  in this  Standard  (item  3/4) is  that collateral  (Rahn)  may be money,  debt or tangible  asset insofar  as  they  might  be  lawfully owned  or created according  to the Shari'ah  and because the debt to be  secured  may be a current  or future obligation.

(1I)  Ala'  AL-Din AI-Mardawi,  "AL-Insaf,  [13: 577].
(12)  Resolution  No.   (419)  of the Shari'ah   Supervisory  Board  of AI  Rajhi   Banking
Corporation  for Investment.
(13)  In  its  Resolution  No.  (372),  the Shari'ah  Supervisory  Board  of AI Rajhi  Banking
Corporation for Investment  stipulated:  It is  prohibited in documentary credit to collect  from the client  any interest  at any stage  of  the credit"  (for discounting and trading in commercial  papers, see item 2/8 where the resolution provides the Shari'ah basis for this ruling).  As regards commission  for providing the facility, the facility is preparatory  to extending  a loan, and hence if commission is prohibited for giving the loan itself it would be obviously correct to prohibit commission for a mere  readiness to do so This conclusion has been adopted  in the Al Baraka 8 Forum in its Fatwa No. (13) and the response of the Shari'ah advisor to Dallah Abaraka Group No.  (I).
(14)  See:  AI-Samarqadi,   "Tuhfat  Al-Fuqaha",  [3:  53-54];  AI-Mardawi,  "AlHnsaf,  [13:
359];  Al-Hajjar,   "Fath A!-Allam",  [5:  44];  Ibn Qudamah, "AI-Mughn,  [6:  444445]; Abu Abdullah  Muhammad Ibn  Muhammad,  Mawahib  Al-Jalil  Sharh  Mukhtasar Khalil",  2'  edition.,  [5:  5],  Beirut:  Dar AI-Fikr,  1978  A.D;  See also Islamic  Fiqh Academy  Resolution  No.  (86)  3/9,  Jeddah;  Fatwa  No.  (5)  of Al Baraka's  5 Forum
and Resolutions No.  (19 and 283) of Al Rajhi Banking Corporation for Investment.



413





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit

The basis for  not allowing the Institution  to sell its share of  partnership, in goods purchased by the client,  for  a delayed payment  to the client is that this amounts to a sale-buy back arrangement  (Bay' al-' Inah), which is prohibited  by the Shari'ah.
• The basis for not allowing negotiability of  documents payable on sight including bills of  exchange for an amount lesser than their nominal value is  that this adopts the form  of  the sale  of  debt,  which is  prohibited.














































414





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit





Appendix (C)
Definitions


Credit Documents

These are the  documents relating to goods  detailed in the credit. The documents are divided into two  types:  basic and additional  documents. Basic  documents include: Shipping documents, commercial invoice, ma• rine insurance policy, certificate ct origin,  consulate invoice  and prom• issory note.  Additional  documents include:  Weights  certificate,  analysis certificate,  review and inspection certificate,  warehouse receipts,  delivery orders,  packing review/supervision   certificate,  test certificate,  medical certificate and non-infection  certificate.  Such certificates are requested to verify certain attributes and characteristics of the commodity and to make sure that it is free  of defects and infection. The certificates are required by the authorities of the importing or exporting country.

Bill of Lading

A bill  of   lading  is   the traditional source  of  shipping  documents.  It indicates  the party authorized  to receive  the goods,  whether  it  is  the original beneficiary,  a party  in whose  name the  bill is  backed   as a collateral arrangement or an agent assigned to receive the  goods.  A bill  of lading constitutes  the practical  execution of the shipping contract signed  between the  shipper  and the  marine carrier.  Shipping  is  the responsibility of  either the buyer or of the seller according  to the  type of International  Sale Contract (Commercial Terms)  adopted.  A bill of lading is  the only shipping document that  can be backed.

Examination of Documents

It is  the process of ensuring that the documents comply with the spec• ifications  indicated  in the letter of  credit.  The general  conditions  for the integrity of documents are detailed through the following four conditions:



415





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Cre dit

■  That the documents are submitted  during  the validity of the credit.
■  That they are complete in number.
■  That they are complimentary and  one document  does not contradict another  and that each contains the required  information  or each serves its function.
■  That they conform  to the conditions  of the letter  of credit.

In case any of these conditions  is missing, for any one of these documents, it  is obligatory  upon  the  bank  to  reject the  documents   as a whole, even those that are not defective.

At Sight Credit

It  is credit that  has to be paid promptly  at sight according  to the value cf the documents,  by the issuing  bank,  the confirming bank or the paying bank,  if the documents  conform  to the conditions  of the credit.

Deferred  Payment Credit

It is  an undertaking given by the issuing,  or confirming bank to pay at a future date,  being the date fixed in the credit,  the value ct the documents if they conform  to the conditions  of the credit.  It differs  from  acceptance
credit  insofar as the beneficiary  does not present  a promissory  note with the documents.

Acceptance  Credit
It is the acceptance  of the bill of exchange attached  to the documents  or is  signed on behalf of the bank; that is,  the bank accepts the obligation  of paying the nominal  value on the date of maturity.

Negotiation of Documents

It is  the payment  of the value of the documents,  or the purchase  of the bill of exchange attached to them; that is,  its discounting, whether  it is to be paid at sight  or after a known  specified period.

Acceptance  of Documents Under Reserve

It occurs when the bank chooses to accept the documents  at  its own risk despite their non-conformance  with the conditions of the credit, paying their value or accepting the bill of exchange attached to them,  on the condition that



416





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Cre dit

it reserves the  right of recourse to the beneficiary if the  issuing bank does not accept the discrepancies  in the documents.  The paying bank usually reserves this  right by way of obtaining  a letter  of guarantee,  covering the value of the documents, from the bank of  the beneficiary.

Marine Letter of Guarantee
It  is an  undertaking given  by  the  issuing  bank  to  place  the  original bill  of lading,  when  received,  at  the  disposal   of the  carrier   in  lieu  of receiving  back a letter from  him.  The carrier  in this case is relieved  from all responsibility that  may  arise  from  the  delivery  of the  goods  to  the importer,  who gives an undertaking to the issuing bank for the acceptance of the  documents regardless  of any discrepancies  in them.  This  type  of letter  is  usually  issued  upon  arrival  ct the  goods  when the documents are to follow or are delayed.

Correspondent Bank
It is  the bank  assigned  by the  issuing  bank  to notify  the beneficiary  of the  credit.  As a rule,  the  correspondent  bank  is  under   no  obligation  to pay the value  of the credit; its  role is  confined  to that  of an intermediary. Correspondent banks  are banks  with which  the institution  makes certain arrangements for accepting  or covering the value of the credits that it issues or confirms.

In case the beneficiary requests notification through  a non-correspondent bank,  the  issuing  bank  sends  its instructions  to  one  of its correspondent banks asking it to process the notification  through  the bank nominated by the beneficiary.

Confirmation of Credit
It is  the merging  of the liability of the confirming bank with the liability of the  issuing  bank  making  both  banks  liable for  fulfilling the conditions of payment  of credit, when  the beneficiary  presents  documents that  meet the  terms  of the  credit.  The  beneficiary   has the  right  to  claim  payment severally from either  bank or jointly  from both banks.
The Paying  Bank
It is  a correspondent  bank  of the  issuing bank  in  the  currency   of the credit  to whom  the issuing  bank entrusts  the payment  of the value of the



417





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit

credit on its behalf, but the paying bank is under no obligation for executing
this trust.

The Covering Bank
Covering banks are types of correspondent banks with which the  bank maintains  an account and  to  whom it delegates  the  authority  to  cover disbursement and negotiation payments upon the first presentation.

Transferable Credit
It is irrevocable credit by means of which  the  beneficiary (first benefi• ciary) requests the bank assigned,  or any other licensed  institution,  to make payment or to undertake to pay in the future or to accept or to negotiate so as  to make the credit  available,  in whole or in part,  to the beneficiary or beneficiaries.

Back to Back Credit

It is irrevocable credit issued for the same purpose as that of transferable credit whenever a credit is  not transf 2rable.

Revolving Credit

It is  credit that is  opened for a fixed value and duration,  except that its value is renewed automatically when it is executed or utilised so as to enable the beneficiary to present documents for a new operation within the value of  the credit, during the period of  its validity, and for the number of times fixed for the credit.

Advance Credit or Red Clause Credit

It is credit  bearing a paragraph written in red ink to invite  attention to its instructions.  In this credit, the authorised bank is assigned  to pay certain amount according to percentage of the value of the credit to the beneficiary in advance before  the  goods  are shipped  and before the documents  that necessitate payment are presented.

Credit Available for Negotiation
This  is credit by which the issuing bank grants to the correspondent bank the legal authority to buy bills of  exchange drawn on the basis of  documentary



418





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (14):  Documentary  Credit

credit  upon  presentation   of bills of exchange   that  are payable  at sight  by the issuing bank or are payable in the future to the  issuer of documentary credit. Accordingly, the seller is able to receive the value of the credit (bills of exchange)  upon presentation  of required  complete documents  that obligate
payment  of the value of the credit.


















































419


























Shari'ah Standard No.  (15)



Ju'alah

(Revised Standard)












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        426
I.  Scope  of the Standard ............so.sos.sos.so.sso.so.ss.sos.sos.so.......      426
2.  Definition of Ju'alah                                 ,                                                          n.,         ..,..............                 426
3.  PermissibilityoftheJu'alah  .........so.sos.coos.so.coo.sass..co.sos.o.......      426
4.  Shari'ah Status of Ju'alah .........sos .so.so.s.sos. sos.so»sos.sos .sos. sos«sa ss .a. ....          426
5.  Elements of Ju'alah and Its Conditions..................................................        4Z7
6. Revocation   ofJu'alah............s.sos.sos..sos..sos.sos6......        429
7.  Distinction between Ju'alah  and ljarah ........sos»so»sos»osoooa...                 430
8.  Applications of Ju'alah...................sos.so........a.........0...............        430
9.  Role oflnstitutions in Ju'.alah..................................................................        431
IO.  Date of Issuance cf the Standard.............................................................        431
Adoption of  the Standard......................................................................        432
Appendices
Appendix (a):   Brief History cf the Preparation cf the Standard.............        433
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard....................................         435




















423








IN  THE NAME OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all  the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all  his companions





Preface


The purpose of this standard  is  to elaborate the definition  of Ju'alah,  to distinguish it from ljarah, to describe its  elements, conditions, legal status in the Shari'ah, fundamental rules, and applications in the transactions  of Islamic fi nandal Institutions (Institution/Institutions),irrespective of the institution  acting as the  general  offeror (demanding performance)  or as the worker (under an obligation to perform), even when this  is  through another,  parallel Ju'alah.


























(1) The  word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer,  in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



425





Shari'ah  Standar d No  (15):  Ju'alah





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope  of the Standard

This standard sets out fundamental rules of the Shari'.ah on Ju'alah and its application in activities for which the extent of the work required cannot be precisely  determined  for it  continues  throughout  the determined period.  It is  for this reason that it does not cover the contract of ljarah for employment/service or leasing, just as it does not cover maintenance contracts or stipulations of maintenance in relation to other contracts, such as the requirement of maintenance in a sale contract or an Istisna'a contract (construction contract).

2. Definition of Ju'alah

Ju'alah  is  a contract  in which  one of the parties  (the  Ja'il)  offers  spec• ified compensation  (the  Ju'l)  to anyone (the  'Amil)  who will achieve a determined  result in a known or unknown period.

3. Permissibility of Ju'alah

Ju'alah is  permissible deeming the determination of the  end result to be realised through it as sufficient, and it is  not affected  by the uncertainty that prevails with respect to the subject-matter of the contract,  that is, the  work to be done.  It is  for this reason that Ju'alah is suitable   for activities for which Ijarah, which requires that the desired work be clearly specified, is not.

4. Shari'ah Status of Ju'alah

4/1  With due consideration to item (6) below in respect to the revocation of Ju'alah,  Ju'alah,  in  principle, is not a binding contract. The general offeror ([a'il) or the worker ('Amil) are entitled to revoke it unilaterally, however, it becomes binding for the Jail when the worker commences work. If the worker undertakes  not  to revoke the contract during a specified period,  it  is binding on him to abide  by the undertaking.



426





Sharf' ah Standard  No  (15):  Ju'alah

4/2   The  possession  of the worker  exercised  over  the  property   of the offeror  is that of a trustee.  He is, therefore,  not liable  except in the case of negligence, misconduct  or violation of the conditions  stipulated by the offeror.
5. Elements  of Ju'alah and Its  Conditions

The elements of Ju'alah  are: The two parties (the offeeror  and the worker), the  form  of the  contract   and the  subject-matter  of the  contract   (the compensation and the work).

5/1  The two parties to the contract (the  offeror  and  the worker)

The existence of legal capacity is  a condition  for both parties  to the contract. It is  not a condition  that the worker be specified, therefore, Ju'alah  is   concluded   by  the  issuance  of  an  offer  directed  at  the general public.  Any person  whom  the offer reaches may undertake the work himself or with the help  of another.  If, however,  the worker is  specified, it is obligatory for him to undertake  the work himself or with the express consent  of the offeror  through  someone  under  his supervision  and control.

5/2 Form of the contract

The  Ju'alah  contract  is  concluded  by  an  offer  directed  towards a specified  worker  or  towards  the  general  public,  irrespective  of such an offer being made  verbally, in writing or through  any other means  that  indicate   an  invitation   to  work  and  an  obligation   to pay the compensation.  Acceptance  of the offer  is  not stipulated  as a condition.
5/3 The subject  matter  of the contract (compensation and  work)

The subject  matter  of the contract  is the work that  is  agreed  upon through  Ju'alah  as well as the compensation for  the work.

5/3/1  Work that produces  the desired result

5/3/1/1 Among the forms of activity that may be agreed upon on the basis of the Ju'alah  contract  are the following:
a)  An activity that is  intended,  through  the agreement,
to produce a result such as the extraction of minerals.



427





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (15):  Ju'alah

b)  Any information in which the offror has an interest such as presenting a rep rt or study r the completi on f scientific works that realise a result, but in which the extent  f the work cannot be deter mined.
c)   An activity that is intended, thr ugh the agreement,
to return lost property to its seeker.

5/3/1/2  It  is  permissible to stipulate  that the job  is  done within a specified  period so that the worker will not be entitled to  compensation  after this  period,  except when the period is  over  and the  result is  close to realisation,  in which case the period will be automatically extended.

5/3/1/3 When the period is over and the worker has done (part of) the work that will benefit the offeror, the worker  is entitled to reasonable wages (Ujrat al-Mithl).

5/3/1/4  The Ju'alah  contract is  valid   despite  uncertainty as  to the nature ct the work, provided that the required result realised  by the work is determined.

5/3/1/5 It is  a condition  that the work involves  some  type of
effort.

5/3/1/6 It is  a condition  that the work not be obligatory for the worker.

5/3/2  The compensation

5/3/2/ The compensation should be  known, valuable in the eyes f the Shari'ah, and deliverable. Ifthe compensation is  unknown,  unlawful  or not deliverable, payment of reasonable compensation becomes binding.

5/3/2/2 The compensation  may be a portion  of the object  of work in Ju'alah,  for instance,  a percentage of a  debt agreed upon for collection or the right to utilise,  for a determined period, a project whose implementation
is agreed  upon.



428





Sharf' ah Standard  No  (15):  Ju'alah

5/3/2/3 As a rule,  entitlement  to compensation  is not estab• lished until the work is completed  and delivered to the offeror.  The following are the exceptions  to the rule:
a)  Where it is evident that the work undertaken  by the worker belongs to someone other than the offror and has been decreed as such, the worker is entitled to the compensation.
b)  Where an accident occurs during work undertaken by   the worker  causing loss  that  was not  due  to the tort or negligence of the worker,  the worker is entitled to full  compensation.

5/3/2/4It  is  permissible  to  stipulate  that  all or  part  of the compensation  be paid in advance at the conclusion of the contract  or thereafter,  even though  this is  before the completion of the entire work,  however,  it is  con• sidered  "subject  to  accounts"  and the worker  is  not
entitled to it without the realisation of the result, the
offeror having the right to reclaim it if the work is not realised.
6. Revocation  of Ju'alah

6/1   If the offeror,  or the worker,  revokes the contract prior to the com•
mencement of work, the worker is not entitled to compensation.

6/2  If the offeror prevents  the worker from working after commencement
of  the work, the offeror is  bound to pay reasonable wages.

6/3  If Ju'alah  contract is terminated  by  the worker  after the work is commenced;  the worker  is  not entitled  to a reward,  except when the parties agree to otherwise.

6/4 If the worker revokes the contract after commencing  the work,  he has no claim against the offeror, unless they had agreed to the con• trary.



429





Sharf'ah  Standard  No. (15):  Ju'alah

7.  Distinction between  Ju'alah  and ljarah

Ju'alah  is  distinguished  from Ijarah on the following grounds:

7/1   Ju'alah is valid despite uncertainty  of work deeming the determination
of the required result by the offeror  as sufficient.

7/2  Ju'alah  does not require acceptance.

7/3 Entitlement  to compensation  depends  on completion  of work and delivery of result.

7/4  Ju'alah  is  valid even if the other party is  not known.

7/5 As a rule,  Ju'alah  is terminable,  while ljarah   is binding.

8. Applications of Ju'alah

Among the applications of Ju'alah  in activities where the extent of work is  undetermined and in which uncertainty  is  overlooked are:
8/1   Exploration for minerals and extraction of water

Ju'alah  contract  may be  used  for the  exploration  for  minerals  and the extraction  of water in situations  where entitlement  to  wages is contingent  upon the finding of minerals or water without reference to the amount  of time or the extent of the period.

8/2  Collection of debts

Ju'alah is used for collecting debts in cases where the entitlement to compensation  is  contingent  upon the collection  of all of the debt,  in which case entitlement to the entire compensation  is  established, or part  of the debt so that compensation  proportionate to the amount of debt collected is due.

8/3 Securing permissible financing facilities

8/3/1  Securing permissible financing facilities means that the worker undertakes  some  work that  leads  the  institution  to  agree to the granting  of financing facilities to the offeror  or to arrange syndicated financing.
8/3/2 Ju'alah  contract  may be  used  for securing  facilities  provided that the condition  of the permissibility of Ju'alah  is met, that is,



430





Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (15):  Ju'alah

the subject-matter of Ju'alah  must  be valid  such as the creation of debt  through Murabahah on deferred  payment,  ljarah  with deferred rental, raising of loans without interest,  issuance  of letters   of guarantee  or  the  opening  of documentary  credit with the  condition that  the  transactions are not  employed  for raising  interest  bearing loans through stipulations, customary practice or dealings  among  institutions.

8/4 Brokerage

Ju'alah  is  used in brokerage  activities in cases where  the entitlement to compensation  is  contingent upon  the conclusion of the contract for which  intermediation  is undertaken.
8/5 Discoveries, inventions  and  designs

Ju'alah is  used for the realisation of scientific discoveries, innovative inventions  and  designs,  such  as symbols  and  trade  marks,  where entitlement to  compensation  is  contingent upon  the  realisation  of the discoveries,  the registration  of patents  or the creation  of designs
conforming to the conditions  elaborated  by the offeror.

9. Role of Institutions in Ju'alah

9/1  It is  permissible for an institution to have the status  of a worker  in Ju'alah  by  contract,  for  work  benefiting others   irrespective  of the institution  undertaking the  work  itself  or  by  contracting  out  the
work through another Ju'alah that is in the nature of a parallel, unless it is stipulated that  the institution will carry  out the work  itself. It is obligatory that  the two Ju'alahs  are not linked.

9/2  It is  permissible for an institution to have  the  status  of the  offeror whether the  work  benefits  the institution  or is for  the fulfilment  of its obligation in a Ju'alah  for the benefit  of another (parallel  Ju'alah) ensuring that  the two Ju'alahs are not linked.

10. Date  of Issuance of the Standard

This Shari'ah Standard was issued on 7 Rab!' I,  1424 A.H., corresponding to 8 May 2004 A.D.



431





Sharf' ah Standar d No  (15):  Ju'alah





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah  Standard  on Ju'alah  was adopted  by the Shari'ah  Board  in its  meeting  No.  (9)  held during  the period  of 11-16 Ramadan  1423  A.H., corresponding  to 16-21  November  2002 A.D.













































432





Sharf' ah Standard  No  (15):  Ju'alah





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No.  (7) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah during the period of 9-13  Ramadan 1422  A.H.,  corresponding to 24-28 November 2002 A.D., the Shari'ah Board resolved to give priority to the preparation af the Shari'ah Standard for Ju'alah.

On Saturday 14 Shawwal 1422 A.H., corresponding to 29 December 2001
A.D., a Shari'ah consultant was commissioned to prepare a juristic study and an exposure draft on the Shari'ah Standards  for Ju'alah.

In its  meeting No.  (1)  held  on 9 Safar  1423  A.H.,  corresponding  to
20  April 2002 A.D., in the Kingdom of  Bahrain,  the Shari'ah  Standards Committee discussed the exposure draft of the standard and made some amendments.
In its meeting No. (2) held on 20 and 21  Rabi' I,  1423 A.H., corresponding to 1  and 2 June 2002 A.D., in the Kingdom of Bahrain,  the Committee also discussed  the exposure draft of the standard and asked the consultant to make the necessary amendments in light of comments and discussions  of the members.

In its  meeting No.  (3)  held on 20 Rabi'  II,  1423  A.H.,  corresponding to  l   July 2002 A.D., in the Kingdom of  Bahrain, the Committee further discussed the exposure draft and made amendments that it deemed suitable in preparation of the submission of the exposure draft to the Shari'ah Board.

The revised exposure draft of the Shari'ah  standard was presented to the Shari'ah Board in its 9th meeting held in Makkah AI-Mukarramah during the period of 11-16 Ramadan 1423 A.H, corresponding to 16-21  November 2002
A.D.  The Shari'ah  Board  made further amendments to the exposure draft of
the standard  and resolved  that   it be  distributed to specialists  and interested



433





Shari'ah  Standar d No  (15):  Ju'alah

parties  for  soliciting their  comments  in preparation  of their  discussion  in a public hearing.
A public  hearing  was held  in Bahrain  on  18  Dhul-Hajjah   1423  A.H., corresponding to  19  February  2003 A.D.  The public hearing  was attended by more  than  thirty  participants   representing  central  banks,  institutions,
accounting  firms, Sharf'ah  scholars, academics and others having interested in  this  field.  The  public  hearing  was  based  on  the  observations   made whether  these transmitted prior to the public hearing or were raised during the public hearing.  The members  of the Shari'ah  Standards  Committees  ( 1) and (2)  responded  to the observations  and comments.

The  Shari'ah  Standards  Committees   (1)  and  (2)  held  a joint  meeting on 2  Muharram   1424  A.H.,  corresponding to  5 March  2003 A.D.,  in the Kingdom  of Bahrain  to discuss  the  comments   made  during  the  public hearing  as  well as those  sent  received  in writing,  inserting  amendments deemed suitable.
The Shari'ah Board in its I0" meeting held in AI-Madinah Al-Munawwarah during  the  period  of 2-7  Rab?'  I,   1424  A.H.,   corresponding   to  3-8 May
2003  A.D.,  discussed the amendments  suggested by the Shari'ah  Standards Committee,  and incorporated  the amendments  that  it found  suitable.  The Shari'ah Board unanimously adopted some of the items cf the standard  and some items were adopted by the majority vote of the members of the Shari'ah Board,  as recorded in the minutes cf the meetings cf the Shari'ah Board.

The Shari'.ah Standards Review Committee  reviewed the standard in its meeting  held on Rabi'  I1,  1433  A.H., corresponding to  March 2012  A.D, in the State of Qatar, and proposed  after deliberation  a set  of amendments (additions,   deletions,   and  rephrasing)   as  deemed   necessary,   and   then
submitted  the proposed  amendments  to the Shari'ah Board  for approval as
it deemed  necessary.

1n  its  meeting No.  (41)  held in AI-Madinah Al Munawwarah,  Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia during the period of 27-29 Sha'ban 1436  A.H., corresponding to
14-16 rune 2015 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the proposed amendments submitted  by the Shari'ah  Standards  Review Committee. After deliberation, the  Shari'ah Board  approved necessary amendments,  and  the standard  was
adopted in its current amended version.



434





Sharf' ah  Standard  No  (15):  Ju'alah





Appendix  (B)

The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Permissibility  of Ju'alah

Ju'alah  contract  is  permissible according to the majority  of the Fuqaha on the basis of the  Qur'an,  the Sunn ah,  Ijma'  (consensus  of Fuqaha)  and Ijtihad  (reasoning) .
• As for the Qur 'an,  the evidence  is in the story of Yusuf (Joseph) and his brother  after the announcement of the loss of the King's great  beaker,
{"For him  who brings it is  the (reward of)  a camel load;  I will stand
surety for  it}.
• As for the Sunn ah, the evidence  is in the report from Abu Sa'id Al-Khu• driabout the stipulation of Jul (compensation) ifthe chief of the tribe was cured through  him and the tacit approval of the Prophet  (peace be upon  him)  of this.
• There is  ljma' (consensus  of Fuqaha)  about the contract of Ju'alah in es• sence with some disagreement about  its scope insofar  as some Fuqaha restricted it to reward  for the return  of a runaway  slave,  as  is  recorded in the Sunnah.
• As for Ijtihad  (reasoning), there is a general need for Ju'alah  in the case
of acts that  cannot  be performed by a person  himself nor  can he find someone  who will volunteer  for him.  Further,  it is  suitable for cases for which the contract of Ijarah  is  not suitable, like the return  oflost prop• erty from an unknown location.
Shari'ah Status of Ju'alah
• The basis for the  principle  that  Ju'alah  is  not binding  for  the  offeror  is
that accrual of the compensation  is  contingent  upon a condition,  thus,

-
(2)  [Yusuf (The Prophet Joseph): 72]
(3)  "Sahih Al-Bukhari"" [5:  2166].



435





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (15):  Ju'alah

it resembles  bequest,  which  is  not binding.  The basis for  Ju'alah  being non-binding for  the worker  is  that the work  to be  done  is uncertain, thus, it resembles  Mudarabah,  which is not binding.
• The basis for regarding Ju'alah as binding when the worker has commenced work is  that  at this  stage Ju'alah  is  similar  to Mudarabah in which  the Mudarib  has commenced work. like Mudarabah, Ju'alah is  considered binding  by the Maliki scholars in such a case.  The basis for  considering it binding  when the two parties undertake  not to terminate the contract during the period of the contract  is that unilateral revocation leads to the loss  of the effort put in by the worker or the likelihood  of injury  for  the fferor.
• The basis for the entitlement of the worker to receive reasonable  wages, when the contract  is revoked after commencement of work, is that the work done by the worker  is  legally valid  and loss is not to be caused to him.  He,  therefore,  has recourse  to reasonable  compensation as is  the case in ljarah  when  it is  revoked  due to a def ct.
Elements of Ju'alah and Its Conditions
• The basis  for the rule that it is  obligatory  in Ju'alah  that all its elements (two  parties,  form,  work  and compensation)  be found   is that  it is a contract and must have these elements. Further, Ju'alah is a commutative
contract  that must have a form to indicate the task required as well as the amount  of compensation.
• The basis for permitting  the worker to seek assistance from others, when
there is no stipulation for his personal services, is that Ju'alah is similar to agency ii. which seeking help from others is valid.
• The  basis  for  not  stipulating  the  identification  of the  worker   and
directing the offer  towards  the general  public  is that the offeror does not know of a person  who is able to achieve what  is required.
• The basis  for not stipulating acceptance  on the part of the worker, when
he is  unknown,  is that it is not possible to obtain his acceptance.
• The basis  fer allowing the work to be uncertain  is the general need along with the impossibility of determining the extent of work.
• The basis for  stipulating that compensation  be known  is  that compen•
sation  is like wages and that  there  is  no need  to validate  Ju'alah  when



436





Sharf' ah Standard  No  (15):  Ju'alah

the  compensation  is  unknown   as against  the  uncertainty  about  the work and the worker.
• The basis for recourse  to reasonable  compensation upon  the vitiation
of the named  compensation   is analogy  constructed   upon  ljarah  with recourse  to reasonable wages upon the vitiation of the named  wages.
• The basis for the permissibility  of compensation  being a portion  of the
subject-matter of Ju'alah,  even though  it is uncertain  and does not ex• ist, is that it is  a type of uncertainty that does not prevent delivery and involves no Gharar  (uncertainty) since entitlement  to compensation is not established  until the task is accomplished.
• The basis for the rule that entitlement  to compensation  is not established
until the work is completed  and delivered, is  that work in Ju'alah is  not determined or certain, therefore, stipulating  payment as compensation would amount  to compensating something  that has not compensation because the work has not been completed.
Applications  of Ju'alah
• The basis for permitting an institution  to undertake  Ju'alah,  as a worker or as an offeror, is the permissibility  of Ju'alah for which natural persons and juristic  persons  have the same legal  capacity.
• The basis for the permissibility  of Ju'alah  for debt collection,  and other
similar acts stated  in the standard,  is  that these  are acts whose precise determination  is difficult and ljarah is not suitable  for them, while Ju'alah is  legally valid  despite  the uncertainty with respect to work




















437


























Shari'ah Standard No. (16)



Commercial Papers


(Revised Standard)












Contents



Subject                                                                                                                          Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................         444

I.  Scope  of the Standard  ..........sass·sos.sos.so.sos.sos.sos·so.sos.sos.so.                            444
2.  Definition and Shari'ah  Characterisation  of Commercial Papers.       444
3.  Rules for Dealing in Commercial  Papers........................................       445
4.  Endorsement...........................................................................................       445
5.  Collection of the Amount of Commercial Papers.........................        446
6.  Discounting of Commercial  Papers..                                                         446
7.  Taking Possession of Commercial Papers.............sos.sos.a..........        446
8.  Acceptance for Payment of the Value of Commercial Papers...........        447
9.  Dated Issuance of the Standard............................................................        448
Adoption  cl the Standard......................................................................        449
Appendices
Appendix (a):   Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard..............        450
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard.....................................        452
Appendix (c):   Definitions..............................................................................        459




















441








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE  ALL-MERCIFUL,  THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and  all his companions





Preface


The  purpose   of this  standard  is  to elaborate   the  rules  pertaining to commercial paper, the types permitted  and those not permitted, the rules for dealing in commercial  paper, its collection, discounting, possession  and the acceptance of the obligation to pay, as well  as the elaboration  of the Shari'ah regulations for Islamic financial Institutions  (Institution/Institutions)" for dealing in commercial  paper.




























(1) The word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



443





Shari'ah  Standard  Na (16):  Commercial  Papers





Statement of the Standard


1.  Scope of the Standard

This standard  covers commercial  papers to which the Geneva  Uniform Convention  on the Law of Commercial  Papers,"   confined  itself.  These are bill of  exchange, promissory note and cheque.  This standard  covers dealings in such commercial  papers insofar as they conform  to the rules and  principles  of the  Shari'ah.  The  standard  does  not  cover anything that may possess the attributes  of commercial  paper other than the three types named  above.

2. Definition  and Shari'ah  Characterisation of Commercial Papers

2/1   Bill  of exchange:  A written,  signed,  and  unconditional order  from a person  to another  person  to pay a certain  sum  of money  at  sight or at a particular or determinable date to a third  person  or to the order  of that third  person  or to the bearer  of that order.
2/2  Promissory  note:  A  certificate  whereby  by  the  issuer  (a  debtor) promises to pay a certain  amount  of money at sight or at a particular or determinable date to another  person  (a beneficiary/creditor). In Shari'ah  characterisation,  it is  considered  a certificate  of debt.

2/3  Cheque:  A certificate  that is  issued  to a particular  person,  contain• ing  an  order  issued  by  a person  (the  drawer)  to  another   person (the drawee) to pay a  certain  sum  of money  to a third  person  (the beneficiary)  at sight.  In  Shari'ah  characterisation,  it  is  considered a restricted  Hawalah  if the  drawer  is  a debtor  to the  drawee.  Oth• erwise,  it is  considered  an unrestricted  Hawalah with respect to the
drawer.

(2)  Issued on  1349/1350  A.H.,  corresponding to  1930/1931   A.D.,  and adopted  by a large
number of countries.



444





Shari'ah Standard  Na (16):  Commercial  Papers

3. Rules for  Dealing  in Commercial  Papers

3/1   It is  permissible to undertake transactions in commercial paper  of the  three  types  (bill  of exchange,  promissory note  and  cheque)  on the  condition that  it  does  not  amount  to the  contravention of the Shari'ah,  like Riha or delay that  is legally  prohibited  in accordance with the details provided  in the following paragraphs.

3/2  It is   not  permissible   to use  a bill of exchange  or  promissory  note in transactions that  require  possession  (of the counter-values), like deeming  the two types of commercial  paper as counter-values in the contract  of Sarf (currency exchange)  or as the counter-value for the capital  (Ras  al-Mal) in the contract of Salam.

3/3  It is  permitted to use a cheque  in the following types of transactions and situations:
a)  A cheque,  where  the  owner  has  a balance,  when  drawn  by  the client  against  the  bank  or by the  bank  against  another   bank or against itself or against one of its  branches.
b) A cheque,  where  the owner  has no balance,  when  drawn  by the client  against  a bank  or  is  drawn  by the  bank against  another bank or against  itself or against one of its branches  (the so-called overdraft). From Shari'ah perspective, it is a loan (Qard)  which is permissible  if it is void of Riba.

c)   A crossed cheque that binds the payee bank to fulfil its conditions.

d)  An account payee cheque that binds payee bank to fulfil its conditions
by crediting the amount  of the cbeque to the beneficiary's account. e)   Travellers  cbeques.  It is  permissible  for  the institution  issuing  it
to take commission in lieu of intermediation  in  such  issuance  or
at the time of its payment  provided  this does not include  Riba.

4. Endorsement

All forms of endorsements are binding  with  respect  to their  legal effects provided  that the endorsements fulfil the legal conditions and regulations determined for them.



445





Sh ari'ah  Standard  No  (16):  Commercial  Papers

5. Collection  of the Amount  of Commercial  Papers

The collection of the amount of commercial papers is considered  an agency with the client  appointing  the institution  as an agent to collect the value of the paper on his  behalf.  The institution  is entitled   to commission  that is  agreed upon  between the client and the institution.  In the absence of an agreement between them,  the practice prevalent among institutions  is to be acted upon.

6. Discounting of Commercial  Papers

6/1   It is not permissible  to discount  commercial  papers,  but it is permitted to pay an amount  that is  Jess than  the value of the paper to the first beneficiary prior  to the date of maturity.
6/2  It is  not permissib]e to sell commercial  paper that has not become due for an amount similar to its value (RRiba al-Nsi 'ah) nor for an amount that is  more than its value (Riba al-Nasi 'ah plus Riba al-Fad7).

6/3  It is  permissible  to the beneficiary  to treat commercial  paper that is not yet due as price for ascertained  goods or usufruct,  but not those that are sold by description  as a liability  with the condition  of actual or legal  delivery of goods or usufructuary  asset (commodity-based discounting  of debts).
6/4 The holder  of commercial  paper  is  permitted  to purchase  goods to be delivered later  (on  the date ri maturity  of  the paper),  and after the debt is  established as a liability. The holder of the paper transf 2rs the claim of his  creditor  to his debtor  through  this paper.  In  such a case,  the transaction  amounts  to Hawalah.

7.  Taking  Possession  of Commercial Papers

7/1  The receipt of  a cheque requiring  prompt  payment, if it is  a banker's cheque or a certified cheque or one that is legally deemed a certified cheques whereby a certain amount  is mandatorily  maintained  in the drawer's  account,  being  drawn  among  banks  or among  banks  and their  branches,  constitutes  constructive  possession  of the  amount written  on it,  and  it is on this  basis  that it is  permissible  to use the



446





Sh ari'ah  Standar d No  (16):  Comm ercial  Pa pe rs

cheque in transactions that stipulate possession  such as the exchange of currencies,  the purchase  of gold  or silver with the cheque  as well as treating the cheque as capital (Ras al-Mal) of Salam.
7/2  The receipt of a cheque that is to be paid promptly, ifit is not a banker's cheque or a certified cheque or one that is  legally deemed  a certified cheque,  cannot  be considered  constructive possession  of its amount, and  in such a case,  it  is  not  permitted  to use it for transactions for which possession  is  stipulated.

7/3  It  is   permitted   to  use  cheques  of bank  transfers   for  transactions when the amount  intended  to be transferred is in the same currency in which  payment  is  to  be  made,  however,  where  the  currency is different  from  that  in which  payment  is  to be made,  it is necessary to first apply the process  of conversion  between  the two currencies, deeming constructive  possession  to be sufficient, and then undertake the transf r.  It is  a form  combining   currency  exchange  (Sarf) and Hawalah.

8. Acceptance for  Payment of the Value of Commercial Papers

8/1   Acceptance  for paying the value of commercial  paper  on the part of the  drawee  is  considered   an undertaking and  an obligation  to pay the debt represented  by the commercial  paper  to the holder  on the date of maturity.  This undertaking and obligation must  be fulfilled according to the Shari'ah.

8/2  All parties whose signatures appear on the commercial paper including the drawer,  the endorser  and the guarantor  are jointly responsible  to pay to the holder  the value of the paper  in accordance  with  rules of liability,  thus,  the holder is entitled to have recourse to them severally or  jointly  after  the refusal  of the drawer  (or  the  issuer   in  case of a promissory  note) to pay.

8/3  Tangible  security. stipulated  by the holder  of commercial   paper  to ensure  the securing  of his right  will be deemed  a Mortgage  (Rahn) and will be governed  by the rules of Mortgage  (Rahn).



447





Shari'ah Standard No (16):  Commercial Papers

9. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Sharf'ah  Standard  was issued  on 7 Rabi'  I,  1424  A.H., corresponding to 8 May 2003 A.D.




















































448





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (16):  Comm ercial  Papers





Adoption of the Standard


The  Shari'ah  Standard  on  Commercial  Papers  was  adopted   by  the Sharf'ah  Board  in its meeting  No (10)  held during the period  of 2-7 Rabi I,  1424  A.H.,  corresponding to 3-8 May 2003 A.D.












































449





Shari'ah Standar d No  (16):  Comm ercial  Papers





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its  meeting No.  (7) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah  during the period of 9-13 Ramadan  1422  A.H.,  corresponding to 24-28 November 2001  A.D., the Shari'ah Board decided to issue the Shari'ah standard  for Commercial Papers  and  to  appoint  a Shari'ah  consultant   for  the  preparation   of the exposure  draft of the Shari'ah  standard  for commercial  papers.

On Saturday 14 Shawwal  1422 A.H., corresponding to 29 December 2001
A.D.,  a Shari'ah  consultant  was commissioned   to prepare  a juristic  study and an exposure draft on the Shari'ah standards  for  commercial  papers.
In its  meeting  held in the Kingdom  cf Bahrain  on 4-5 Safar  1423  A.H., corresponding to 17-18 April 2002 A.D., the Shari'ah Standard Committee discussed   the  exposure  draft  of the  Shari'ah  standard  on  commercial papers and asked the consultant  to make  necessary amendments to reflect the comments  and observations  made by the members  of the Committee. The Committee  discussed the exposure draft of the standard  in its  meeting held  in the Kingdom of Bahrain  on 6-7 Rabi'  II,  1423  A.H.,  corresponding to  17-18  June  2002 A.D.,  and  introduced   necessary  amendments  as per observations  and comments  of the members.
The exposure draft cf the standard  was also discussed by the Committee in its meeting  held  in Amman,  the Hashemite  Kingdom  of Jordan  on  17
Rabi'  II,   1423   A.H.,   corresponding  to  28   June  2002  A.D.,   and  further amendments  were incorporated  in the standard.
The revised  exposure  draft  cf the  Shari'ah  standard  was presented  to the  Shari'ah  Board  in its 9th  meeting  held  in Makkah  Al-Mukarramah during  the  period  of 11-16  Ramadan  1423  A.H.,  corresponding to  16-21
November  2002 AD.  The Shari'ah  Board  made further  amendments to the



450





Shari'ah Standard  No  (16):  Comm ercial  Papers

exposure draft of the standard  and decided that it be sent to specialists and interested  parties  in order  to obtain their  comments  in preparation   for its discussion  in a listenig session.

A public  hearing  was held  in Bahrain  on  18  Dhul-Hajjah   1423  A.H., corresponding  to  19  February  2003 A.D.  The public hearing  was attended by more than thirty participants  representing central banks, institutions, accounting   firms,   Shari'ah   scholars,  academics   and  others  interested  in the  field.   The  members  of the  Shari'.ah   Standards   Committees   (1)  and
(2)  responded  to the written  comments  that were sent prior  to the public hearing  as well as to the oral comments  that were expressed  in the public hearing.

The Shari'ah Standards  Committees  (1)  and (2)  held a joint meeting on 2
Muharram  1424 A.H.,  corresponding  to 5 March 2003  A.D., to discuss the comments  made during the public hearing as well as comments  received in writing.  The two Committees made the amendments  considered  necessary.

The Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. (10) held in Al-Madinah  Al• Munawwarah  during  the period  of 2-7 Rabi' I,  1424  A.H.,  corresponding to  3-8 May 2003 A.D,,  discussed  the  amendments  made  by the  Shari'ah
Standards  Committee   and  made  amendments  considered   suitable.  The Shari'ah Board unanimously  adopted  some of the items, while other  items were adopted  by a predominant majority  vote, as recorded  in the minutes of the meetings  of the Shari'ah  Board.

The Shari'ah Standards Review Committee  reviewed the standard in its meeting  held on Rabi' II,  1433  A.H.,  corresponding  to March  2012  A.D., in the State  of Qatar,  and proposed  after deliberation  a set  of amendments (additions, deletions, and rephrasing) as deemed  necessary, and then submitted  the proposed  amendments to the Shari'ah  Board  for approval as it deemed  necessary.
1n  its meeting No. (41) held in Al-Madinah  Al-Munwwarah, Kingdom of Saudi  Arabia  during  the period  of 27-29 Sha'ban  1436  A.H.,  corresponding to  14-16 June 2015 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed  the proposed amendments  submitted  by the Shari'ah Standards  Review Committee.  After deliberation, the Shari'ah Board approved  necessary  amendments, and the standard  was adopted  in its  current  amended  version.



451





Shari'ah Standard  Na (16):  Commercial  Papers





Appendix  (B)

The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Dealings in Commercial Papers
The basis  for the  permissibility  of dealing  in a bill of exchange is that it is  in the meaning of Hawalah or Qard (loan)  contract,  which are agreed upon  by ljma'  (consensus  of  Fuqaha),  or  in the  mea• ning  of Suftajah  (demand  note),  which  is  valid  according  to  the preponderant   opinion.   The  evidence  for  this   is  the  report  from a number  of Companions  (may  Allah  be pleased with them)  who dealt in these instruments.  It is  reported  from Abdullah Ibn Abbas (may Allah  be pleased with him) that he used to take silver from tra• ders at Mecca and write  down a demand note for them to be paid at Kufa.  It is  related from Abdullah Ibn Al-Zubayr that he used to take dirhams  from traders  at Mecca and then  write  a note drawn upon his brother Mus'ab in Iraq.  When Ibn Abbas was asked about this, he saw no harm in the transaction. AI-Muwaffaq Ibn Qudamah," may Allah confor mercy upon him, has related from Ali (may Allah   be pleased with him)  that he was asked about a similar transaction  and he saw no harm in it.  Further, in the Suftajah is the interest of both the lender and the borrower without harm being caused to either one of them. The lender is secure against the danger of the highway in trans• porting his dirhams to the destined town, while the borrower benefits from the loan and is  also secure against the dangers of the highway being under an obligation to pay in the said town.  The Shari'ah  does not lay down a prohibition  for interests that do no invoke harm.

(3)  This has been related  by A!-Bayhaqi  in Al-Sunan Al-Kubra" [5:  352];  and see Muhammad
Nasir AI-Albani,  Irwa' Al-Ghali! Fi Takhrij Ahadith Manar AI-Sabi!" [5:  328].
(4)  41-Maughn" [6:  436].



452





Shari'ah Standar d No  (16):  Comm ercial  Papers

• Shaykh  Al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah  (may Allah confer mercy upon him) has said:  "The  correct  view is  that  of permissibility,  because  both  the lender  and  the borrower  benefit  from  such  raising  of a loan,  and  the Shari'ah does not proscribe what benefits them and is  in their interest; it proscribes what is  harmful  for them." In addition  to this, there is  no text that prohibits  a Suftajah nor is  such meaning  implied by the texts. It is, therefore, necessary to maintain its permissibility,, especially when there is a general need fr it.""
The  basis  for  the  permissibility  of a promissory  note  is that  it  is
considered  a document  acknowledging a debt,  and  Allah,  the  Al• Mighty, has commanded the securing of debts, as He, the A-Mighty says:   {"O you  who believe! When you  contract  a debt for  a fixed period,  write it down.  Let a scribe write it down in justice  between y0u..?'}0
■   The permissibility; ct a cheque  drawn  by the client upon  a bank, with which he has a balance is that it is  in the nature  of Hawalah.  The Muhil (transferor) is  the accountholder, the Muhal is  the beneficiary and the Muhal Alayh (transferee)  is  the drawee bank.
The permissibility of a cheque  drawn  by the lient  upon  a bank with
which  he does  not  have a balance  is  that  it  is  Hawalah.  This  view is held  by those  who do  not  stipulate  for the permissibility  ct Hawalah that the transferee  be indebted  to the Muha! (transferor)  with Hawalah (transfer)  being valid for a person who does not owe a prior debt. Some jurists call this absolute Hawalah a Hawalah upon one with no liability. The  second  view is  that  it  is  an agency  for  borrowing,  and  both  are (independently) valid. This rule, however, is contingent upon the cheque no invoking Riba by way ct an overdraft,  for banks usually do not lend without  interest.  Banks will not  accept  cheques  drawn  upon  them  by clients with no balance except by charging  Riba-bearing  profits that are due firom  the client along with  the value ct the cheque.  Consequently, if the  cheque  drawn  by the  client  upon  the  bank,  where  he does  not

(5)  Maj? Al-Fatawa" [29:  531].
(6) See:  41-Maughnt" [6: 437]; Majm? Al-Fatawa" [20: 515]  and [29: 531]; and Ibn Qayyim
Al-Jawziyyah,  "Tahdhib Sunan Abu Dawud" [5:  152].
(7)  [AI-Baqarah  (The Cow):  282].



453





Sh ari'ah  Standard No (16):  Commercial Papers

have a balance,  includes  Riba-bearing  profits  it is  prohibited;  it is  not permissible to write such a cheque  nor to undertake  transactions  in it. The basis for the permissibility of dealing in crossed and account payee cheques,  and the obligation of the payee bank to abide by the conditions
stipulated  by the  accountholder  for  the  two types  of cheque,  is the
generality  of the Hadith  stating:  "Muslims abide  by the conditions   they stipulate " The reason is  that such a condition  promotes the inherent interest  of the contract.  Further,  the primary  principle  for  conditions and contracts  is  that of permissibility.
Endorsement
The  basis for the  permissibility  of endorsement   is that  it  does  not  go beyond the meaning  of either Hawalah (transfer)  or Wakalah (agency),  and both are permissible.

Discounting of Commercial Papers
■   The basis for  not  permitting  discounting  of commercial  paper  is  that in reality the discounting  of commercial paper amounts  to a loan  with interest. What affirms this is that the interest charged through discounting varies according  to the value of the commercial  paper  and  its date  of maturity,  and loan  with interest is  prohibited by agreement.
The permissibility  of  paying less than  the value of  the paper, when the transaction   is   between  the  holder  and  the  first  beneficiary,  is  that  it belongs to the category of the issue  known  as "negotiating  a def zrred debt  for part  of it paid  promptly"  This  is  what  is  known  as Da' Wa Taajjal  (reduce   the  amount   for  hastening   payment),   and  according to one opinion  it  is  permissible  to undertake  such a transaction.  The evidence that supports  permissibility  is  the Hadith  of lbn Abbas (may
Allah be pleased  with him),  stating;:  "When  the Prophet  (peace be upon
him)  decided to  expell  Banu  Al-Nadir,  they said,  O Messenger of Allah,

(8)  This Hadith  has been related   by a  number of  reporters   of  Hadith.  See  "Sunan  Al• Tirmidhf" [4: 584] Al-Hakim, 4lMustadrak" [4: 101]; and SunanA!-Daraqutnr" [3: 27]. The Hadith  has been narrated   by Amr Ibn Awf and is connected   to the Prophet  (peace be upon him). It has a number  of different Isnad (chains of transmission)  to the  Prophet. This is why A!-Bukhari  related it in his "Sahi" [4: 451]  as a Mallaq  (Suspended) Hadith. Muhammad Nasir Al-Albani  has investigated  the chains of transmission   of this Hadith Irwa'  AL-Ghalil"  [5:  142-146]  and concluded that the Hadith  is generally authentic in view of the number af its  Isnads.



454





Shari'ah  Standard  No (16):  Commercial  Papers

you have  ordered  our expulsion  when  we have  against people debt claims that  are not yet due.'  The Prophet  (peace  be upon  him) said,  'Reduce  the amounts  to  hasten  payments." Ibn  Abbas (may  Allah be pleased with him), was asked  about the issue  of a person who has a deferred claim against another, and he says to the debtor, "Hasten the payment  and I will reduce the amount for you", so Ibn Abbas  responded saying, "There is  no harm in it': Ibn Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him), was the narrator of the previous Hadith.  Further, this issue  is the opposite of the issue of Riba. That is, Riba  involves an excess in both the period and the amount, whicb is entirely  harmful for tbe debtor,  whereas this  issue involves  the absolving of the liability  ct the debtor with respect to the debt  with a benefit coming to the  creditor through prompt payment. Each one of them benefits  without being subjected to barm. This  is different from Riba,  the prohibition of whicb is agreed  upon and that causes injury to the debtor.  'The benefit in Riha is  exclusively for the creditor (owner of capital). Thus, this case differs from Riba in both form and meaning. Tbe reason is that the excess in Riba  as a counter-value for the period leads to a grave hardship,  for a single dirbam is  doubled and multiplied keeping the Dhimmah (liability) engaged without any corresponding  benefit. In the case of reduction  of the amount and bastening of payment,  the liability ct the debtor is  removed and the prompt payment benefits the creditor.  The  Law-giver  encourages the  discbarging of debt liabilities. The debtor has been called a person imprisoned by difficulties,  and thus in  the discharging his  liability is  a release   from these  shackles.  This  is different  from his remaining patiently burdened with an excess.9

(9) This  Hadith   has been related    by  a  number of Hadith reporters.  See:  AlTahawi, "Sharh Mushkil  Al-Athar"  [11:  56];  A!-Bayhaqi,  Al-Sunan  AL-Kubra"  [6:  28];  "Sunan Al-Daraqutnf [3:  46];  and Al-Hakim ,   "Al-Mustadrak"  [2:  52].  bn Al-Qayyim  said in Ighathat Al-Lahfan"  [2:  11]:  This  Hadith  has been related as per  relation  conditions of  "Al-Sunan  AI-Kubra".  AI-Bayhaqi  has classified  the Hadith as weak  but  the men in the chain of transmission  of the Hadith are trustw orthy.  However,  the Hadith has been classified  as weak due  to  Muslim   Ibn  Khalid who is a narrator  in  the chain af transmission  af the Hadith. Nevertheless, he is a trustworthy  and reliable jurist as Imam Shafi'i has related  Hadiths  through him and regard his view as authoritative.
(10)  "Ighathat Al-Lahfan" [2:  1I];  and "T'lam AI-Muwaqqf'in"  [3:  313].



455





Sh ari'ah  Standar d No  (16):  Comm ercial  Pa pe rs

The basis for treating  commercial paper as a price for ascertained goods is that  it amounts to the  sale of a debt,  to a person  other  than  the one who owes it, for ascertained goods. This  is permitted according  to the Maliki school  if it takes  place after possession  so that  it does  not  turn into the delaying  of the two counter-values.  A resolution  pertaining to this has been  issued  by the Islamic Fiqh Academy  of the Organization of Islamic  Conference.D
Taking  Possession of Commercial  Papers
• The basis for considering  a cheque, whether  certified or one of the same type,  as possession  of the  amount  mentioned in it,  is  that  a cheque  is secured by  a large  number  of guarantees  that  make  the  possessor  the owner  of its  contents.  The beneficiary in this case is  able to undertake transactions  in it by selling,  buying or by making a gift. Further,  there  is a strong protection provided  by state governments to support confidence in cheques. In addition to this, relying upon a cheque means the existence of sufficient  funds to cover its amount  with  the certifier  undertaking to retain  the funds  until  the end of the period  fixed for  payment.  It is  for this  reason that people in general pref zr  certified  cheques  over cash for large  transactions.
• The  basis  for  not  considering  an uncertified cheque,  or  one  that  is
similar  to it as far as the possession  of its amount is  concerned,  is  the probability that there is no balance  to cover it or there is an insufficient balance. 'The basis for possession  is customary practice, and a resolution has been  passed  by the  Islamic  Fiqh Academy  deeming  the receipt  of a certified  cheque  as possession.
The basis for the permissibility of dealing in cheques for bank transf 2rs,
when the  intention  is  to transfer  the same currency  in which  payment is  to  be made,  is  that  it  belongs  to the  category  of Suftajah, which  is permissible  according  to one out of two opinions of the jurists.
Payment Guarantees for the Value of Commercial Paper
• The basis for considering a guarantee  for acceptance as an undertaking and an obligation  on the part of the drawee to pay to the legal holder, on

(I1)  In its  16  session held in Mecca on  21-26 Shawwal  1422  A.H.



456





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (16):  Commercial Papers

the date of maturity, the amount  of debt stated on the bill of exchange, is that this undertaking and obligation is to be fulfilled according to the Shari'ah. This requirement  is due to the generality of the words of Allah,
the Exalted, saying:  {"O you who believe! Flfil (your) obligations"},
as well as due to the generality;  ct the saying of the Prophet  (peace be upon him):  "Muslims  abide  by the conditions they stiplate.3
The  conditions   a person  stipulates  for himself,  and  by which  he  is bound, are included in this meaning. There is also the Hadith ofJabir Ibn Abdullah  (may Allah be pleased with him), who said:  "The Messenger of  Allah  (peace  be  upon  him)   did  not  pray  over  (the   funeral  of) a person  who  died  while  owing  a debt   A dead  person  was brought to  him  (for  prayers)  and  he said,  'Does  he owe  a debt?  'The people replied,  'Yes,  he owes two  dinars'  At this Abu Qatadah  Al-Ansari  said,
'The  two  dinars  are on me,  O Messenger  of Allah?  The Messenger  of
Allah (peace be upon him)  then offered the funeral prayers for him.09
In this Hadith, we notice that Abu Qatadah  Al-Ansari  (may Allah be pleased  with  him)  offers  an  undertaking and  accepts  the  obligation to  pay  the  debt  owed  by the  deceased,  and  this  is accepted  by  the Prophet  (peace be upon him). In fact, this undertaking and obligation given by Abu Qatadah  were deemed  sufficient to absolve the deceased from  all liability  for the debt.  In some different  texts of the Hadith,  it has been reported  that after the statement  of Abu Qatadah  (The two dinars  are on me),  "The Prophet (peace  be upon him) said,  'The right
of the creditor  is due  and   the deceased  is absolved of it'  Abu Qatadah
responded   in the  affirmative,  so the  Prophet   (peace  be  upon  him) prayed  over him?9 The removal  of all liability for the debt from  the deceased  was  due  to  the  undertaking  and  obligation  given  by Abu Qatadah  (may  Allah be pleased  with  him),  to pay the debt due form this  person  and  because  of which  he became  indebted  to  the  extent

(12)   [A1-Ma' idah (The  Table):  1].
( 13)   The source of the Hadith is stated earlier.
(14)  This text of  the Hadith has been related  by  Abu   Dawud in  his Sunan"  [9:   193].
However,  the Hadith has origin in the two authentic  books of  Hadith. See:  Sahih
Al- Bukhari" [2:  467]  and Sahih Muslim" [3:  1237]  (H:  1619).
(15)  This narration  has been related by Imam Ahmad in his "Musnad" [3:  330].



457





Shari'ah Standar d No  (16):  Comm ercial  Papers

of two dinars. Al-Muwaffaq Ibn Qudamah   (may Allah confer mercy upon him)  said:  "The words of the Prophet  (peace  be upon  him):  'The deceased  is absolved  of it' mzan  that 'you have now become  subject to the claim for two dinars'  This  is  by way of emphasis  for  establishing the claim against him as well as the obligation  to pay.9
The  basis  for  permitting  the  holder  of commercial   paper  to  have recourse  to all persons  who have signed  the  paper  is  that by doing  s they bind themselves  to the  extent of the value of the  paper  in case of non-payment.  'The Ulama  arrived  at a consensus  on the permissibility of guarantees  on the whole.
• The basis for the permissibility  of guarantees  through  tangible  assets is that these  are treated  as Rahn  (mortgage)  and  are governed  by the same rules that  apply  to Rahn.  The Ulema  arrived  at a  consensus  for
the permissibility  of Rahn (Mortgage).































(16)  "A1-Maughn+" [7:  85].



458





Shari'ah Standard  Na (16):  Commercial  Papers





Appendix (C)
Definitions


Commercial  Papers

Tradable certificates that represent pecuniary  rights payable at sight or after a short period. Customary practice  regards them as instruments  of payment and they act as substitutes for cash in transactions.

Bill of Exchange

A certificate issued in a particular legal form.  It consists of an order from a person (known  as the drawer)  to another person (known as the drawee) to pay a certain sum of money at sight,  or at a particular  or determinable date, to a third person (called the beneficiary).

Promissory Note

A certificate whereby the issuer promises to pay a certain sum ct money at a particular or determinable  date,  or at sight,  to another person (called the beneficiary).

Cheque

A certificate that is  issued  in a particular form containing  an order is• sued by a person  (known as the payer) to another  person (known as the payee)  to pay a certain  sum of money to  a third  person  (known as the beneficiary) when the cheque is presented.

Crossed Cheque

A cheque written  in the form of an ordinary cheque except that it is distinguished by two parallel  lines on the face of the cheque.  The cross• ing places an obligation upon the payee bank not to pay the value of the cheque to  a person  other than  a client of the payee bank or to another bank.



459





Sh ari'ah  Standar d No  (16):  Comm ercial  Pa pe rs

Certified Cheque

A cheque  written  in the form  of an ordinary cheque  and  distinguished by the  word  "certified" or "accepted"  or whatever gives this  meaning,   on the  face of the  cheque  along  with the  date  and  the  address ct the  payee bank with  the signatures of the certifying official  whereby the payee bank certifies  the authenticity of the  signature of the payer  and  the existence  of sufficient  funds  in his account for  payment of the value  of the  cheque  to
the beneficiary.

Banker's Cheque (Bank Draft)

A cheque  issued  by the payee bank  (to its client)  guaranteeing payment
ct the value  ct the cheque  to a third party. Account Payee  Cheque
A cheque  written  in the form  of an ordinary cheque  to which  the issuer
adds  a statement indicating that  its value  should not  be paid  in cash, but upon  conditions stated, like a statement written  on the  face of the  cheque saying "Account Payee" or any other  statement bearing  the same meaning.

Travellers' Cheque

Cheques  drawn   in  varying  values  by  institutions  upon  their   foreign branches  or correspondent institutions in the interest  ct a traveller who will receive  their  value  by merely  presenting them  fer  payment to a party  that will accept them.

Cheques  for Bank Transfers
A cheque  written  by an institution, upon  the  request  of a person, who intends   to  remit  his  cash  through the  institution,  by way of cheques,  to another location,  so that  he,  his  agent,  or any other  person  may receive it.

Endorsement

A  legal  act  by  means  of which  ownership  in the  commercial  paper  is transferred from one person  (known  as endorser)  to another person  (known as the endorsee), or it has the effect, through  a statement, ct creating an agency for collection or a mortgage.





Shari'ah Standard  No  (16):  Commercial  Papers

Discounting of Commercial Papers
A process by means of which the holder of commercial paper,  through an endorsement, transfers ownership in it to a third party prior to the date of maturity  with the  institution  discounting  the value by  a determined amount in lieu of early payment.

Acceptance to Pay
The undertaking  by  the drawee to pay the value of the bill of exchange to the lawful holder at the date of its maturity.

Guarantee or Guarantor

The bank as guarantor  provides a guarantee to  the holder  for paying the value of the commercial paper by way of a guarantor  along with other signatories if the primary debtor refuses to pay.

Tangible Guarantees

These are guarantees  stipulated  by  the holder  of commercial  paper through the creation of a mortgage on real estate, or a mortgage of movables, like commercial paper or negotiable instruments that the debtor endorses over to the holder by way of mortgage or goods that the debtor delivers to the holder as a security for payment.


























461


























Shari'ah Standard No.  (17)



Investment  Sukuk












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        468
I.  Scope of the Standard ............so.sos.sos.sos.sso.sos.so.sos.sos.so........      468
2.  Definition of Investment Sukuk ........so.sos.sass.sos..so..so..so.so.......      468
3.  Types of Investment Sukuk:       , .....••........... ,                                  ,.......................       468
4.  Characteristics of Investment Sukuk ........sos.sos.sos.so.sass.sos..      47L
5. Sharf'ah   Rulings arxl Regulations...........................................................        472
6.  Date d Issuance of the Standard............................................................        481
Adoption of the Standard.............as...s.....sos...s....so..............        482

Appendices
Appendix  (a):   Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard.............        483
Appendix  (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard.....................................        485
Appendix  (c):   Definitions..............................................................................        487

























465








IN  THE NAME OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all his companions





Preface


The aim of this  standard  is to elaborate the Shari'ah  rules for  the issuance and  trading  of investment Sukuk  (certificates)  as well as the elaboration  cf their  types,  characteristics,  Shari'ah  regulations  and the  conditions for  the issuance of Sukuk and dealings in them for trading by Islamic financial insti• tutions  (institution/institutions).






























(1) The word  (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic  financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



467





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk





Statement of the Standard


1.  Scope of the Standard

This  standard  covers investment  Sukuk. These Sukuk  include Sukuk of ownership  of leased  assets,  ownership  of usufructs,  ownership  of ser• vices, Murabahah, Salam, Istisna'a, Mudarabah,  Musharakah, investment agency and sharecropping (Muzaraah), irrigation  (Musaqat) and agricul• tural (Mugharasah) partnerships.  The standard  does not cover shares of joint  stock companies,  certificates of funds and investment  portfolios.

2. Definition of Investment Sukuk

Investment  Sukuk are certificates cf equal value representing  undivided shares  in ownership  of tangible  assets, usufruct  and  services or (in  the ownership   of)  the  assets  of particular   projects  or  special  investment activity, however, this is  true  after receipt of the value of the Sukuk, the closing  of subscription   and  the  employment  of funds  received  for the purpose  for which the Sukuk  were issued.
In this  standard,  Sukuk  have been  designated  as  Investment  Sukuk  in order to distinguish  them  from shares  and bonds.

3. Types of Investment Sukuk

Investment  Sukuk  are of different types, and among these are:

3/1   Certificates of ownership in leased  assets

These  are certificates  of equal value  issued  either  by the  owner  of a leased  asset or  a  tangible  asset to  be leased  by promise,  or they are issued by a financial  intermediary acting on behalf of the owner with  the  aim of selling the  asset and  recovering  its  value through subscription  so that the holders of the certificates become owners of the assets.



468





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk

3/2  Certificates of ownership  of usufructs

3/2/1  Certificates  of ownership  of usufructs  of existing assets

These are two types:

3/2/1/1  Certificates   of equal  value  issued  by the  owner  of an existing asset either on his own or through  a finan• cial intermediary:, with the aim ct leasing the asset and receiving the rental  from the  revenue  of subscription so that the usufruct  of the assets passes into the own• ership of the holders of the certificates.
3/2/1/2 Certificates  of equal value issued  by the owner of the usufruct  ct an existing asset (lessee),  either on his own or  through  a  financial  intermediary,  with  the aim  ct subleasing the  usufruct  and  receiving the rental  from the revenue of the subscription so that the holders of the certificates become owners of the usufruct  of the asset.

3/2/2 Certificates of ownership of usufructs of described future assets

These are certificates  of equal value issued for the purpose  of leasing out tangible  future  assets and for collecting the rental from  the  subscription   revenue  so  that  the  usufruct  of the described future asset passes into the ownership  of the holders of the certificates.

3/2/3  Certificates  of ownership  of services of a specified party

These  are  certificates  of equal  value  issued  for the  purpose of providing  services  through   a specified  provider  (such  as educational  benefits in a nominated university) and obtaining the service charges in the form of subscription  income so that the holders of the certificates become owners of these services.

3/2/4  Certificates of ownership  of described  future services

These are certificates  of equal value issued for the purpose  of providing  future  services  through   described  provider   (such as educational  benefits  from  a university  without  naming  the
educational  institution)   and  obtaining  the  fee  in the form  of



469





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk

subscription   income  so  that  the  holders   of the  certificates become owners of the services.

3/3  Salam certificates (Salam Sukuk)

These  are  certificates   of  equal  value  issued  for  the  purpose   of mobilising  Salam  capital  so that  the goods  to be  delivered  on the basis of Salam  come to be owned by the certificate holders.

3/4 Istisna'a certificates  (Istisna'a Sulruk)

These are certificates of equal value issued with the aim of mobilising funds to be employed for the production  of goods so that the goods produced  come to be owned by the certificate holders.

3/5  Murabahah certificates (Murabahah Sulruk)

These  are  certificates  of  equal  value  issued  for  the  purpose   of financing  the  purchase  of goods  through  Murabahah   so  that  the certificate holders become the owners of the Murabahah  commodity.

3/6 Musharakah certificates (Musharakah Sulruk)

These  are certificates  of equal value issued  with  the  aim  of using the  mobilised   funds  for  establishing   a  new  project,   developing an existing  project  or financing  a business  activity  on the  basis of any of partnership   contracts  so that the certificate  holders  become the  owners  of the project  or the  assets of the  activity as per  their respective shares,  with  the Musharakah  certificates  being managed on the basis of participation  or Mudarabah  or an investment  agency.

3/6/1  Participation  certificates

These are certificates representing projects or activities managed on the basis of Musharakah by appointing one of the partners or another person to manage the operation.

3/6/2  Mudarabah  Sukuk

These are  certificates that represent projects or activities man• aged  on the basis  f Mudarabah  by appointing one of the part• ners  or another person as the Mudarib for  the management of
the operation.



470





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk

3/6/2  Investment  agency Sukuk

These  are  certificates   that  represent   projects   or  activities managed  on the basis of an investment  agency by appointing an agent to manage  the operation  on behalf ct the certificate holders.

3/7  Sharecropping certificates  (Muzara'ah  Sulruk)

These are certificates of equal value issued for  the purpose  of using the funds mobilised through  subscription  for financing  a project on the basis of Muzara'ah so that the certificate holders become entitled to a share  in the crap according to the terms ct the agreement.

3/8  Irrigation  certificates (Musaqat  Sukuk)

These  are  certificates  of  equal  value  issued  for  the purpose   ct employing   the   funds   mobilised   through   subscription   for  the irrigation  of fruit bearing trees, spending  on them  and  caring  for them  on  the  basis  ct a Musaqat  contract  so  that  the  certificate holders  become  entitled  to a share in the crop as per agreement.

3/9 Agricultural  certificates  (Mugharasah  Sukuk)

These are certificates of equal value issued on the basis of a Mugharasah contract for the purpose of employing the funds for planting trees and undertaking  the work and expenses required  by  such plantation  so that the certificate holders become entitled to a share in the land  and the plantation.

4. Characteristics of Investment Sukuk

4/1   Investment  Sukuk are certificates ct equal value issued  in the name ct the owner or bearer in order to establish the claim of the certificate owner over the financial  rights  and  obligations  represented  by the certificate.
4/2  Investment  Sukuk  represent  a common  share in the ownership  of the  assets  made  available for investment,  whether  these  are  non• monetary  assets,  usufructs,  services  or a mixture  of all these  plus intangible  rights,  debts  and  monetary   assets.  These  Sukuk do  not represent  a debt owed to the issuer  by the certificate holder.



471





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment Sukuk

4/3  Investment  Sukuk are  issued  on the  basis of a Shari ah-nominated contract  in accordance  with  the  rules  of Sharf'ah  that  govern  their issuance  and trading.

4/4 The trading  of Investment  Sukuk  is subject to the terms that govern trading  of the rights they represent.

4/5 The  owners  of these  certificates  share  the  return  as stated  in  the subscription   prospectus   and  bear  the  losses in  proportion  to  the certificates owned (held) by them.
5. Shari'ah Rulings  and Regulations

5/1   Issuance  of investment Sukuk

5/1/1  It is permissible  to issue  investment  certificates by way of sub• scription on the basis of any of Shari'ah-nominated investment contract.

5/1/2  It is permissible to issue certificates for (to securitize) assets that are tangible assets,  usufructs and services by dividing them into equal shares and issuing certificates for their value. As for debts owed as a liability,  it is  not permissible to securitize them fer the purpose  of trading.
5/1/3  The issue  contract  has all the legal  effects of the contract  upon which the issued certificates are based. This occurs after closing of the subscription  and the allotment  of the certificates.
5/1/4 The  two parties  of the  issue  contract  are the issuer  and  the subscribers.

5/1/5  The relationship  between the two parties  to the issue  contract is  determined on the basis of the type of contract  and its status in the Shari'ah  as well  as the following description:

5/1/5/1  Certificates  of ownership  of leased assets

The issuer  of these certificates is seller of a leased  asset or an  asset to  be leased  on promise,  the  subscribers are the buyers of the asset,  while the funds  mobilised



472





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk

through  the subscription  are the purchase  price of the asset.  'The   certificate  holders  jointly  own the  assets through  an  undivided  ownership  sharing  the  profits and  losses  on  the  basis  of the partnership   that  exists between them.

5//5/2Certificates  of ownership  of usufructs
a)    Certificates cf ownership of the usufruct of exis•
ting assets

The issuer of these certificates is the seller of usufruct of  an  existing asset,  the  subscribers  are buyers of such usufruct,  while the funds  mobilised  through subscription  are the purchase price of the usufruct. The certificate holders become joint  owners of the usufruct  sharing  its benefits  and risks.
b)   Certificates  of ownership   of described   usufruct to be made available in the future
The issuer of these certificates is the seller of usufruct cf an asset to be made available  in the future as per specification.  The  subscribers   are  buyers  of the usufruct through, the funds mobilised through subscription  are the purchase price of the usufruct. The certificate holders become joint owners of the undivided  usufruct  sharing  its benefits and risks.
c)    Certificates  cf ownership of services

The  issuer of these certificates is the  seller of ser• vices,  the  subscribers  are  buyers  of the  services, while  the  funds  mobilised  through   subscription are the purchase price cf the services.
The certificate holders are entitled to sell the profits cf all the types that are listed at (a),  (b)  and (c)  and are entitled  to the  income  from the  resale cf such usufruct.



473





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk

5/1/5/3 Salam  certificates  (Salam Sukuk)

The  issuer  of the  certificates  is a seller  of  the  goods of Salam, the subscribers  are the buyers  of the goods, while the funds realised from subscription are the purchase    price   (Salam  capital)   of  the   goods.   The holders   of  Salam  certificates  are  the  owners   of  the Salam  goods  and  are entitled  to  the  sale price  of the certificates or the  sale price  of the  Salam  goods  sold through  a Parallel Salam,  if any.

5/1/5/4 Istisna'a  certificates  (Istisna'a Sukuk)

The issuer of these certificates  is the manufacturer (supplier/seller),  the subscribers  are the buyers  of the intended product, while the funds realised from subscription are the cost of the product. The certificate holders  own the  product and  are entitled  to the  sale price of the certificates  or the sale price of the product sold on the basis of a Parallel  Istisna'a,  if any.

5/1/5/5 Murabahah certificates  (Murabahah  Sukuk)

The issuer of the certificates  is  the seller of the Muraba• hah commodity, the subscribers  are the buyers of that commodity,,  and the realised  funds  are the purchasing cost of the commodity.  The certificate holders  own the Murabahah  commodity, and are entitled to its sale price.

5/1/5/6 Musharakah certificates  (Musharakah  Sukuk)

The issuer af the certificates is the inviter  to a partner• ship with him in a specific project or determined activ• ity. The subscribers are the partners  in the Musharakah contract. The realised funds are the share contribution of the subscribers  in the Musharakah capital. The cer• tificate holders own the assets of partnership with the accompanying  profits  and  losses  and  are entitled   to
their  share in the profits of the partnership,  if any.



474





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk

5/1/5/7 Mudarabah  certificates (Mudarabah  Sukuk)

The  issuer  of these  certificates   is the  Mudarib,  the subscribers  are the owners of capital,  and the realised funds   are  the   Mudarabah   capital.   The   certificate holders  own the assets of Mudarabah and the agreed upon  share  of the  profits  belongs  to  the  owners  of capital and they bear the loss,  if any.

5/1/5/8 Certificates ct investment  agency (Wakalah  Sukuk) The issuer of these certificates is the investment  agent,
the  subscribers   are  the  principals   and  the  realised
funds are the entrusted  capital of the investment.  The certificate  holders  own the  assets  represented  by the certificates  with  its  benefits  and  risks,  and  they  are entitled  to the profits,  if any.

5/1/5/9 Muzara'ah certificates  (Muzara'ah  Sukuk)

a)    The issuer of these certificates  is  the owner  of the land (the  principal  owner or owner of  the usufruct ct the land). The subscribers  are the cultivators  on the  basis ct a Muzara'ah  contract   (the  cultivators or their assignees). The realised funds are the cultivation  cost.
b)   The issuer  of  these certificate may be the cultivator (the worker), the subscribers  are the owners of  the land   (investors  whose  subscription   amounts   are
used to  buy the  land);  and the  certificate  holders
are entitled to a share of  the produce  ct the land  as per agreement.
5/1/5/10 Musaqat  certificates  (Musaqat  Sukuk)
a)   The  issuer  ct these  certificates  is   the owner  (or owner of usufruct)  of  the land  that consists af trees; the subscribers are those who assume the obligation of irrigation through  a Musaqat contract, while the realised funds are the maintaining  cost of  the trees.



475





Shari'ah  Standard No (17):  Investment  Sukuk

b)   The issuer of these certificates  may be the irrigator (the  worker)  and the subscribers  are the owners  of the land (investors whose subscription amounts are used to  irrigate  the  land).  The  certificate  holders are entitled  to a share of the produce of the trees as per agreement.

5/1/5/11 Mugharasah certificates (Mugharasah  Sukuk)

a)   The issuer of these certificates is  the owner  of land suitable  for  planting   (trees),  the  subscribers  are those who assume the obligation  of planting  on the basis of a Mugharasah contract, while the realised funds are the cost of maintaining the plantation.
b)  The  issuer  may  be  the  planter  (the  owner  of  the work),  the subscribers  are  the owners  of the  land (investors  whose subscription  amounts  are used to
undertake plantation in the land), and the certificate holders  are entitled  to a share in both the trees and the land  as per agreement.

5/1/6  The  relationships  between  the parties,  namely  the issuer  and the  subscriber   shall  be governed   by  applicable  contracts   of issuing  Sukuk.  The mere  conclusion  of the  contract  will give rise to legal effects with respect to rights  and obligations  of the parties.

5/1/7  The issuance of the prospectus represents  the issuer's invitation to subscription  in which case the act of subscription represents an offer.  As for acceptance,  it  is  issuer's  approval  of the  sub• scription,  unless it is  expressly stated  in the prospectus  that  it is  an offer. In this case, the prospectus will be considered as an offer and the subscription  becomes an acceptance.

5/1/8  The following shall  be observed  in the prospectus of issue:

5/1/8/1  The prospectus  must include all contractual  conditions, adequate  statements  about the participants  in the issue,



476





Shari'ah  Standard No (17):  Investment  Sukuk

their  legal  position  and  rights  as well   as obligations, such as statements about the issue agent,  issue manager, originator,  investment  trustee,  the party covering  the loss,  payment  agent  as well as others  along  with the conditions  of their appointment  and dismissal.

5/1/8/2  The prospectus ofSukuk  must include the identification of the contract on the basis  ct which the certificates are to be issued, such as sale of  tangible leased assets, ljarah, Murabahah,  Istisna'a,  Salam,  Mudarabah,  Musharakah,
Wakalah,  Muzara'ah,  Mugharasah  or Musaqat.

5/1/8/3 The contract  that forms the basis of the issue must be complete  with respect to  its elements and  conditions and  should  not  include  conditions  that  conflict  with its objectives and rules.

5/1/8/4  The prospectus must explicitly mention the obligation to abide by the rules and principles  of  the Shari'ah,  and that there is  a Sharf'ah  Supervisory Board  that approves the procedures ct the issues and monitors the implementation of  the project throughout its  duration.

5/1/8/5 The prospectus  must  state that  the  investment  of the realised funds and the assets  into which the funds are converted  will be  undertaken  through  Shari'ah-com• pliant modes of investment.
5/1/8/6 Taking into account item  3/1/5 of the Shari'ah Standard No. (12) on Sharikah (Musharakah) and Modern  Cor• porations,  the prospectus  must  state  that  each owner
of a certificate participates  in the profit and bears a loss in proportion to the fi nancial value represented  by his certificates.

5/1/8/7 The  prospectus  must  not  include  any  statement   to the effect that  the issuer of the certificate  accepts the liability to compensate  the owner of the certificate  up to  the  nominal   value  of the  certificate  in situations



477





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk

other  than torts and negligence  nor that he guarantees a fixed percentage  of profit.  It is,  however,  permitted to an independent third  party  to provide  a guarantee
free of charge,  while  taking into account  item  7/6 of
Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (5)  on  Guarantees.  It is also permitted  to  the   issuer  of  the  certificate   to  offer some  tangible   or  personal   guarantees   with  respect to  its wrongful  acts or  negligence,  while  taking  into account  item  3/1/4/3  of Sharf'ah  Standard  No. (12)  on Sharikah   (Musharakah)  and  Modern   Corporations
as well as the contracts  stated  in that standard.

5/1/9  It is permissible  for the institution  to undertake  to underwrite the  unsubscribed  issue,  in  which  case the  obligation  of  the underwriter is  based cm  a binding  promise.  The underwriter should not receive any commission  in lieu ct such underwriting taking into account  item  4/1/2/4  of Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (12) on Sharikah  (Musharakah) and Modern  Corporations.

5/1/10  It is permissible  to issue  Sukuk on a short-term, medium-term or long-term  basis  in accordance   with  the  principles  of the Sharf'ah.  The  Sukuk  may  also  be issued  without  specifying a period  depending   upon  the nature  of the contract  underly• ing the Sukuk  issue.

5/1/11  It  is  permissible for the issuer  or the certificate holders to adopt permissible  methods  ct managing  risk, of mitigating  fluctua• tion of distributable  profits  (profit  equalisation  reserve),  such as establishing an Islamic insurance  fund with contributions of certificate holders, or by participating  in insurance  (Takafl) by payment  of premiums  from  the income  of the shares of Sukuk holders or through  donations  (Tabarruat) made by the Sukuk holders.

5/2  Trading of Sukuk and their  redemption

5/2/1   It  is  permissible,  after closing subscription,  allotment  of Sukuk
and commencement ct activity, to trade in and redeem investment



478





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk

Sukuk that represent  common  ownership  of tangible assets, usufructs  or services.  As for  trading  or redemption  prior  to the commencement af activity, it is  necessary to observe the rules of the contract  of Sarf (currency exchange)  along with the rules for debts (receivables) when liquidation  is complete and the assets are receivables  er when the assets represented  by  the Suk:uk are sold for a deferred price.

5/2/2  In the case of negotiable Sukuk, it is permissible for the issuer to  undertake,  through  the  prospectus  of issue,  to  purchase at market  value,  after  the  completion of the  process  of issue, any  certificate that  may be offered to him, however, it  is not permissible  for the issuer  to undertake to purchase the Sukuk at their  nominal  value

5/2/3  The certificates may be traded  through any known  means, that do not contravene the rules of the Shari'ah, such as registration, electronic  means  or actual  transmission  by the  bearer to the purchaser.

5/2/4  It is  permissible,  immediately  upon  issue  and  up to the  date of maturity,,  but  after  the  passing  of ownership of the  assets to the holders   of the Sukuk, to trade  in Sukuk  that  represent ownership af  existing  leased  assets  or assets  to  be leased  on promise.
5/2/5 It is  permissible  for the  issuer to  redeem,  prior  to maturity., certificates of ownership of leased  assets at the market  price or at a rate  agreed  upon, at the date  of redemption, between  the certificate  holder  and the issuer

5/2/6  It is permissible to trade  in securities of ownership of usufructs of tangible  assets prior  to a contract for sub-leasing the assets. When  the assets are sub-leased, the certificate represents rent receivables, which  makes  it a debt owed  by  the  second  lessor subject  to the rules  and regulations for disposal  of debts.
5/2/7  It is permissible for the issuer to redeem  Sukuk of ownership of the usufruct of tangible  assets from the holder,  after allotment



479





Shari'ah  Standard No (17):  Investment  Sukuk

and  payment   of the  subscription  price,   at the  market  price or  at a price  agreed  upon  between  the parties  at the  time  of redemption,  on  the  condition   that  the  subscription  amount or redemption price  is  not  deferred.  [see item  3/4 of Shari'ah Standard No.  (9)  on Ijarah and Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek]

5/2/8 It is   not  permissible  to  trade  in certificates  of ownership   of usufructs  of a described   asset  before  the  asset  from   which usufruct  is   to  be made   available  is   ascertained,  except  by observing  the rules for disposal  of receivables.  When  the asset is  ascertained, trading  in Sukuk of usufructs of such asset may take place.

5/2/9     is  permissible  to trade  in securities  of ownership  ct services to be provided  by a specified  party  prior  to sub-leasing  such services. When the services are sub-leased,  the certificate represents   rent  receivables  to  be collected  from the  second lessee.  In  this  case,  the  certificate  represents  a debt  and  is, therefore,  subject  to the  rules  and  regulations  of disposal  of debts.

5/2/10  It not is permissible to trade in securities of ownership of services to be provided  by a party to be specified in the future before the source from which the services would be provided  is  identified, except by  observing  the rules  for dealing  in debts.  When  the source of services is  identified,  trading  in such Sukuk  may take
place.

5/2/11  It is  permissible to  set up  a parallel  Ijarah  on  tangible  assets by employing  the same  description  for the  usufruct that  was provided  to the holders  of the Sukuk  in cases detailed  in items
5/2/8   and  5/2/10   provided   the two  lease   contracts  remain
independent.

5/2/12  It is permissible  for the second buyer of the usufruct  of existing and specified assets to resell them. The buyer is also entitled to issue certificates  in this  respect.



480





Shari'ah  Standard No (17):  Investment  Sukuk

5/2/13  It is permissible  to trade  in or redeem  Istisna'a certificates if the funds  have been  converted,  within  the period  of the Istisna'a, into  assets  owned  by certificate holders.  If the  realised  funds are immediately paid as a price in a parallel  Istisna'a contract or the manufactured item is  submitted to the ultimate  purchaser, then trading  in Istisna'a certificates is subject to rules of disposal
of debts.

5/2/14  It is  not permissible to trade  in Salam certificates.

5/2/15  I is   not  permissible  to trade  in Murabahah  certificates  after delivery  of the Murabahah commodity to the  buyer. However, trading  of Murabahah certificates  is  permissible  after purchas• ing the Murabahah commodity and before selling it to the buyer.

5/2/16 I is  permissible  to  trade in  Mudarabah,  Musharakah and investment agency  certificates after  closing  of subscription, allotment of the  certificates and  commencement of activity with  respect  to the  assets and usufructs.
5/2/17  I is  permissible to trade  in Muzara'ah  and Musaqat  certificates after  closing   of subscription,  allotment  of certificates  and commencement cf activity with respect to the assets and usufructs. This rule applies when the certificate holders  own the land.  Thus, trading  in these  certificates  is  not  allowed where  the certificate holders act as workers (who undertake  to provide agricultural  or irrigation works) in which case trading  in these certificates is  not permissible before the maturity cf the fruits and plants.

5/2/18  It  is permissible to trade  in Mugharasah  certificates  after closing of subscription,  allotment of certificates and  commencement of activity  irrespective of the  certificate holders  being  owners Of the land  or workers.

6. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard  was issued on 7 Rabi' I,  1424 A.H., corresponding to 8 May
2003A.D.



481





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment Sukuk





Adoption of the Standard


The Sharf'ah Standard on Commercial Papers was adopted  by the Sharf'ah
Board in its  10 meeting held on 2-7 Rabi' I,  1424 A.H.,, corresponding to 3-8
May2003A.D.













































482





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment Sukuk





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No.  (7) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah during the period of 9-13  Ramadan  1422  A.H,,  corresponding  to 24-28 November 2002  A.D., the Shari'ah Board decided to give priority  to the preparation  of the Shari'ah Standard  for Investment Sukuk.

On Saturday 14 Shawwal  1422 A.H., corresponding to 29 December 2002
A.D.,  a Shari'ah  consultant  was commissioned   to prepare  a juristic  study and an exposure draft on the Shari'ah Standards  for Commercial  Papers.
In its  2 meeting of Committee  (1),  held in the Kingdom of Bahrain  on
4-5  Safar  1423  A.H.,  corresponding  to  17-18  April 2002  A.D., the Shari'ah Standard Committee discussed the exposure draft of the Shari'ah Standard on Investment Sukuk  and asked the consultant to make additional  amendments to reflect the comments  made by the  members of the committee.

In its meeting No. (4) held on 16 and I7 Rabi' I,  1423 A.H., corresponding to 28-27 June  2002 A.D.,  the committee  discussed  the exposure  draft and made necessary amendments as per the  comments  and observations  of the members  and in the light of  the recommendations Of AAOIFTs First Fiqh Forum  in respect to requirements  of trading  in investment  portfolios  held in Amman  (The Hashimite Kingdom  of Jordan)  on  16 Rabr' I, 1423 A.H., corresponding to 27  June  2002 A.D.

In its  meeting  No.  (5)  held on 2 and 3  Rajah 1423  A.H.,  corresponding to  9-10  September  2002  A.D.,  and  decided  to merge  the exposure  ct this Standard  with  the exposure  draft  of the  Standard  on  Securitisation.  In its meeting No.  (6) held on 19  Rajab 1423  A.H., corresponding to 26 September
2002 A.D.,  in the Kingdom ct Bahrain, the Committee  further discussed the



483





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk

exposure  after the merger,  made some amendments and decided  to present
it to the Sharf'ah  Board.

The  revised  exposure  draft  of the  Sharf'ah  Standard  was presented to the  Shari'ah  Board  in  its  9th  meeting  held  in Makkah  Al-Mukarramah during  the  period  of 11-16  Ramadan   1423  A.H.,  corresponding to 16-21
November 2002 A.D.  The Sharf'ah  Board made  further amendments to the
exposure  draft  ct the  Standard   and  decided  that  it  should  be distributed to specialists  and  interested  parties in order  to obtain  their  comments in order to discuss  them  in a public  hearing.

A public  hearing  was  held  in Bahrain  on  18  Dhul-Hajjah   1423  A.H., corresponding to 19  February  2003 A.D.  The public  hearing  was attended by  more  than  thirty  participants  representing central  banks,  institutions, accounting  firms,  Sharf'ah   scholars,   academics    and   others   who   are interested  in this field.  Members  of the Shari'ah  Standards  Committees (1)
and  (2)  responded to  the  written  comments  that  were  sent  prior  to  the public  hearing  as well as to the oral comments that  were expressed  in the public  hearing.

The Shari'ah  Standards  Committees (1)  and (2) held a joint  meeting on
2 Muharram  1424  A.H.,  corresponding to 5 March  2003 A.D.,  to discuss the comments made  about  the exposure  draft.  The two committees made the necessary  amendments in light ct both the written  comments that were received  and oral comments that took place in the public  hearing.

The Sharf'ah Board in its meeting No.  (10) held in A]-Madinah Al-Munaw•
warah during  the period  of 2-7 Rabi' I,  1424  A.H., corresponding to 3-8 May
2003   A.D.,, discussed the amendments made by the Shari'ah Standards Com• mittee, and made  necessary  amendments.  The Shari'ah  Board unanimously adopted  some of the items  of the Standard  and some items  were adopted  by
the majority  vote of the members  of the Shari'ah  Board,  as recorded  in  the
minutes of the meetings  of the Shari'ah  Board.









484





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment Sukuk





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


■    The basis for the permissibility of issuing investment certificates is  that such certificates are usually issued on the basis  of Shari'ah-nominated contracts.  Hence issuance of Sukuk on the basis of any of these contracts becomes acceptable  as well.
■       The basis for considering the issue  prospectus  as an offer  and the fact of subscription  as an acceptance is  that valid contracts take place on the basis ct anything that indicates consent without specifying a particular form  of expression.  It is thus not objectionable that an offer comes from one person and acceptance from a large number ct persons.
■    The basis for the right of certificate holders  to management  is  that they
own the property  that  their certificates represent,  and management  is part of ownership.
■    The basis  for permissibility of trading  in investment Sukuk  when such
Sukuk represent shares in tangible assets a- usufruct is that the trading is, in fact,  on the assets and usufructs.  Since  these assets may be traded so too the certificates that represent them.
•  The basis for impermissibility <i trading in Salam certificates is  that the
certificate represents a share in the Salam debt in which case the certifi•
cates is  subject to rules of debt trading.
• The basis for permissibility  of trading in Istisna'a certificates after conversion of the realized funds into assets is that such assets represent properties  that  can be disposed  of.  The basis for the impermissibility of trading  in Istisna'a  certificates in  case of using the realized funds as a price in  a parallel Istisna'a and in case of delivering the manufactured asset to the ultimate purchaser is that the certificate represents the price in the liability of the purchaser. The price then is a monetary  debt for which trading  of  the  Sukuk at this stage is subject to the rules of debt trading.



485





Shari'ah  Standard  Na (17):  Investment Sukuk

• The  basis  for the impermissibility of trading in Murabahah  certificates after the commodity is sold and delivered to the buyer is that the certificates represent a monetary  debt against the buyer, in which case trading is  not permissible except in accordance with the limitations of debt trading.  However, if purchase of the commodity  has  taken place and is yet to be sold,  trading in these certificates is permissible because the certificates represent assets that can be traded.














































486





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk





Appendix (C)
Definitions


Securitisation  (Tawreeq)

Securitisation  is   known  in Arabic  terminology  as  Tskik (issues)  and Tsnid  (securities).  Securitisation  is  a process of dividing ownership of tan• gible assets, usufructs  or both into units of equal value and issue  securities as per their value.

Issue Contract

Issue contract is  the contract that form  basis for issuance  of the investment certificates.

Issuer of Investment Certificate

Issuer of investment  certificate is  the party who uses the realised funds in a Shari'ah-compliant  investment  instrument.  The issuer  could be a firm, an  individual,  a  government  or  a  financial  institutiOn.  The  issuer  may delegate,  for  a consideration  or commission,  the process of arranging  the operation  of the issue  to a financial intermediary,,  which may be stipulated by the issue  prospectus.

Issue Agent

It  is  an intermediary  institution  that manages  the process  of issue  and performs  all procedural  arrangements  pertaining   to the  issue  on  behalf of the  issuer  against  a specific  fe to  be agreed  upon  or  to  be stated  in the prospectus  of issue.  The relationship  between the issuer  and the issue agent is  governed  agency contract  with  remuneration.
Issue Manager

Issue manager is  the intermediary, institution  that acts for  remuneration
on behalf of the subscribers  in executing the issue  contract.



487





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (17):  Investment  Sukuk

Payment  Underwriter

Payment  underwriter  is  the intermediary institution  that undertakes  to
pay dues of certificate holders after when realised.

Investment Manager
Investment   manager  is the  party appointed by the  issuer or the  issue manager  to perform  all or part  of investment  operations as indicated  in the issue  prospectus.

Investment Trustee
Investment trustee  is  the intermediary  financial institution  charged with protecting  the interests  of certificate holders,  supervising  the performance of the  issue  manager  and  safe custody  of documents  and  guarantees  for consideration  stipulated in the issue prospectus on the basis of agency contract

Trading  of Certificates
Trading of certificates  refers to disposal of the ownership right contained in the  certificate  through   selling,  pledging,  gift or any other  permissible means of disposal.

Muzara'ah (Sharecropping)
Sharecropping  is  partnership  in crops in which one party presents  land to another  for cultivation and maintenance  in consideration  for a common defined share in the crop.
Musaqat  (Irrigation)

Irrigating  partnership is  a partnership  that depends  on  one party pre• senting  designated   plants/trees  that  produce  edible  fruits  to  another   in order  to work on their  irrigation in consideration for a common  defined share in  the fruits.
Mugharasah (Share-Agriculture)

Agricultural partnership is  a partnership  in  which  one party presents a treeless piece of land to another to plant trees on it on the condition that they share the trees and  fruits  in  accordance  with a defi ned percentage.








488

























Shari'ah Standard No.  (18)



Possession  (Qabd)












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        494

].  Scope  of the Standard  ..........sass·s os.s os.so.sos . so s. sos· s o.so s .s o . so . ,          494
2},    Definition of Possession ......sos.sass.sos.sos.sos. so.s os....so s.so s .s.so. .so                      494
3.  Mode of  Taking Possession  .........s....o...o..o o.so.sos.so.s as s .so.s o.sass.........                     494
4.  Expenses ci Possession      ,f'                                                                   't-                 , •• ,._, ••. ,.,                         ,., •• ~          +••··"      ,             496
5.  Key Modern  Applications of Possession                                                         497
6  Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................         498
Adoption oaf the Standard........sssssssssss··sss··sss··sos·s··ss··sos··sss·sos··6s,·,        499

Appendices
Appendix  (a):   Brief History  f the Preparation  of the Standard.............         500
Appendix  (b):  'The  Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard.....................................         502

Appendix  (c):   Definitions..............................................................................         510

























491








IN  THE NAME OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all his companions





Preface


The purpose  of this standard  is to elaborate actual possession  in contracts along  with its related  Shari'ah rules  as well as the  significant applications undertaken by Islamic financia1  Institutions (Institution/Institutions). Cll

































(1) The  word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



493





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na  (18):  Possession (Qabd)





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard  covers possession in contracts and what acts as a constructive substitute  for it  (constructive  possession).  It elaborates  the mode  of its realisation  in immovable  and movable  property  as well  as in things that are ascertained  and  those  established  as a liability by description.  The standard  also identifies the person  responsible for its costs (maintenance and  expenses)  in  various  types  of contracts  along  with  their  modern applications.

The standard  does not cover acts other than contracts,  like possession  in usurpation (Ghasb) and the like. Further, it does not cover the nature of possession with respect to liability for compensation or otherwise, nor to possession  in set-offs,  as these have their specific standards.
2. Definition of Possession

Possession is the gathering of a thing or what takes its  rule,  according  to
the requirements of customary practice.

3. Mode of Taking  Possession

3/1   The basis for determining  the mode of possession in things is custom ('Urf).  It is  for this reason  that possession  of things  has differed  in accordance  with the nature  of things and differences among  people with respect to things.

3/2 Actual possession  is  realised in immovable  property  through  relin•
quishment  and enabling transactions  in it.

3/3 Actual possession takes place in movables through  physical corpore• al delivery.  Constructive  possession,  in ascertained  movables  as well as in those established  as a liability by description, takes place -after their ascertainment by means of one of the methods  known for their



494





Sharr'ah  Standard  Na (18):  Possession (Qabd)

ascertainment-  by relinquishing  (releasing)  the thing  for  the person entitled  to  it  enabling  him to  deliver it without  any  obstacle  even when  no transportation or transmission has taken place. This takes place  irrespective  of the  thing  being  one that  is acquired  by hand in practice  or is  one in which  delivery (transmission)  is  stipulated through   one  of the  customary  units  of measure  -cubic  measure, weight or linear measure-  or it  is  a commodity  to which these mea• sures do not apply due to their inapplicability  or with the possibility of their applicability,  but the measures are not applied,  as in the case of sale by estimate.

3/4 Constructive  possession  includes the registration  of a mortgage  of immovables and (hypothecation)  of mobile movables  like cars, trains, steamers  and airplanes  through  registration  that  is  valid  under  the law.  Registration  stands  in place of actual possession with respect to its  rules and legal  effects.

3/5 The  possession  of documents,  like bills  of lading  and  warehouse receipts,   issued   in  the  name  of the  possessor   or  acknowledging his  interest  therein  is  deemed  constructive  possession  of what  the documents  represent  if the  ascertainment  of commodities,  goods and appliances is attained through  them  along with the ability of the possessor  to undertake  transactions  in them.

3/6 Prior possession of a tangible thing stands in place of subsequent lawful possession due to a cause acknowledged by the Shari'ah irrespective of the possession of the prior possessor being on the basis of the liability to bear loss  (Daman)  or one of trust  (Amanah)  and  irrespective  of the  subsequent  constructive  possession  entailing liability  for loss  or a burden ct trust (Amanah).

3/7Reciprocal  possession   stipulated  in the  contract  of Sarf (transac• tion  in  gold,  silver and currencies)  is  delivery  and  acceptance   of delivery  within the  session  of the contract   on a spot basis (Yadan
Bi Yadin).  [see  item 2/6 ofShari'ah  Standard  No.  (1)  on Trading  in
Currencies)



495





Sharr'ah  Standard  Na (18):  Possession (Qabd)

4. Expenses of Possession

4/1 Expenses of possession in financial commutative  contracts

4/1/1 The expenses of delivering the sold  commodity  -for  presenting it if it is absent, for ascertaining it through one of the customary units where that entails a claim for ascertainment  like wages of employing a cubic measure, weight, linear measure and counting• is the responsibility of the seller. As for the expenses of delivering the price, ifany, it  is the responsibility of the buyer, unless there is a stipulation or customary practice to the contrary, in which  case it is binding to follow such stipulation or practice.

4/1/2  The expenses of conveyancing, witnessing, preparation of instru• ments that record a sale and the formalities of registration  are borne as stipulated by  the parties to the contract.  If there is  no such stipulation on their part, customary practice is relied upon.

4/1/3  Where  it is  stipulated  by the buyer for the seller that the sold commodity   be delivered  at a particular  place, other  than  the one where it is  present  at the time  of the contract,  and that it be delivered at the expense of the seller, the seller is  bound  to deliver it at the specified place and the expenses of transporting it to such place will be borne by the seller.

4/1/4  The  rules  for the  expenses  of possession  explained  in items
4/1/1,  4/1/2  and 4/1/3  apply  to  all  financial   commutative contracts,   like  Salam,  Istisna'a  and others.  Accordingly,  the expenses  of delivering the Salam commodity will be borne  by the  seller, the expenses  of delivering  the capital  (Ras al-Mal) will be borne by the Rab al-Salam (the  buyer);  the expenses of taking  possession  of  the leased property  will be borne  by the lessor, the expenses  for the delivery of possession  of the lease value  (wages)  shall   be borne  by the  lessee; and  the expenses for  delivering  the  subject  matter  of Istisna'a  will be borne  by the  manufacturer,  while  the  expenses  for the  delivery  of the price shall be borne by the orderer.  In all these cases, if there is a customary  practice  or stipulation  to the contrary, then, such practice or stipulation  shall be observed.



496





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (18):  Possession (Qabd)

4/2 Expenses for delivery  of possession in a loan  (Qard)

4/2/1  The expenses  for delivery and recovery  in a contract for loan, expenses  that  pertain  to its ascertainment through one of the customary units of measure  and the like, shall be borne  by the borrower.

4/2/2 The  expenses  for  the drawing  up  of documents,  promissory notes,  title deeds and the like that  are required  for transacting a loan  contract;  its  implementation or documentation shall be borne by the borrower. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (19) on Loan (Qard),  item  8]

4/3  Expenses for delivery  of possession in a deposit (Wadi'ah)

The expenses of deposit and withdrawal  in a contract of deposit shall
be borne by the depositor  (the owner of the deposit).

5. Key Modern Applications of Possession

5/I   Possession  by the  beneficiary of a bank  draft  or personal  cheque is  deemed   constructive  possession  of the amount   payable  by  the drawee  bank.  This  is  deemed   possession   of the payable  amount even  though   there  is  delay  in the  payment   of the  actual  amount, keeping  in view what  is  laid down  in Shari'ah Standard No.  (1)  on Trading  in Currencies  (item  2/6/5)  as well as what  is  laid  down  in the  Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (12)  on  Commercial  Papers  (items  6/1 and 6/2).

5/2  Payments for a credit  card  are  deemed  constructive possession   of such payments.  [see Shari'ah Standard No. (2)  on Debit Cards  and Credit  Cards  (item  4/4)]

5/3 A deposit by a person  of an amount  in a bank account  maintained for a debtor, upon his demand  or with his consent, is deemed constructive possession  irrespective  of the  deposit   being  by  way  of cash,  by endorsement or by cheque drawn upon a bank with which an account is  maintained,  and  the depositor  is  absolved  of liability  when  he is indebted  to the extent of such amount.



497





Sharr'ah  Standard  Na (18):  Possession (Qabd)

6. Date of Issuance  of the Standard

This Standard  was issued  on 30 Rab'  I,  1425  A.H.,  corresponding to 19
May 2004 A.D.




















































498





Sharr 'ah  Standar d No.  (18):  Po ssession (Qabd)





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Standard on Possession was adopted by the Shari'ah Board in its  12 meeting held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah during the period of 26-30 Rabi I,  1424 A.H.,  corresponding  to 15-19 May 2004 A.D.












































499





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (18):  Possession (Qabd)





Appendix  (A)
Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard

In its meeting  No.  (8)  held  during  the  period  of 28  Safar  to 4 Rabi' I,
1423 A.H.,  corresponding to  11-16 May 2002  A.D.,  in Al-Madinah  Al• Munawwarah, the Shari'ah Board decided  to issue the Exposure  Draft of Shari'ah  Standard  on Possession  (Qabd).

On  24 Rajab  1423  A.H.,  corresponding  to  1     October  2002 A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Standards  Committee  decided  to assign  to a Shari'ah  consultant the responsibility  of preparing  the Exposure  Draft of the Shar'ah  Standard on Possession (Qabd).

The Shari'ah Standards Committee  (1), in its meeting No. (7), which was held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 16 Muharram  1424 A.H., corresponding to  19  March  2003  A.D.,  discussed  the  Shari'ah  study  and  required  the consultant  to incorporate  certain  necessary  amendments in the light cf the
discussion  and the comments  made by the members.

In its  meeting  No.  (8)  held on  16-17  April 2003 A.D.,,  in the Kingdom of Bahrain, the Shari'ah  Standards  Committee  ( l) discussed  the exposure draft of the Standard  on Possession in the light of the discussions  and the observations  of the members, just as the Committee  discussed the exposure draft  in  its  meeting  held during  the period  of 25-26  Rabi'  II,  1424  A.H.,
corresponding  to 25-26 June  2003 A.D.,  and made necessary  amendments to the draft in the light of the discussion  and observations  of the members.
In its  meeting  No.  (9)  held  in  Amman,  the  Hashimile   Kingdom  of Jordan,  during  the period of 23-24  Jumada  I,   1424  A.H.,  corresponding to  23-24  July  2003  A.D.,  the  Committee  discussed   the  exposure   draft and  made  necessary  amendments in the light of the discussions  and  the observations  of the members.



500





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (18):  Possession  (Qabd)

The revised exposure draft of the Standard was presented to the Sharf'ah Board  in its meeting No.  (11)  held in Makkah  Al-Mukarramah  during  the period of2-8 Ramadan 1424 A.H., corresponding  to 27 October-  2 November
2003  A.D.  The  Shari'ah  Board  incorporated   amendments  to  the exposure draft of the Standard and decided that it be distributed  among specialists and interested parties in order to obtain their comments as a preliminary  to the discussion in a public hearing.

A public hearing was held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 29 Dhul-Qadah
1424 A.H., corresponding to 21  January 2004 A.D. The public hearing was attended by more than fifteen participants representing central banks, institutions, accounting firms, Shari'ah scholars, academics and others interested  in the field. The members  of the Shari'ah  Standards  Committees (1) and (2)  responded  to the written  comments  that were sent prior to the public  hearing  as well as to the oral comments  that were expressed  in the public hearing.

The Sharf'ah  Standards  Committees  (1)  and  (2)  in a joint  meeting in the  Kingdom  of Bahrain  on 30 Dhul-Qa'dah  1424  A.H., corresponding to 22 January 2004 A.D., discussed  the comments  that were made during the  public  hearing  as well as the  observations  received  in writing.  The Committees made  amendments that were deemed  suitable.

The amended  exposure  draft was  presented  to the Drafting  Committee in  its  meeting  held  in  the  Kingdom  of Bahrain  on  25   Safar  1425  A.D, corresponding  to 15  April 2004 A.D.

The Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. (12) held in Al-Madinah  Al• Munawwarah during the period of26-30 Rabi' I,  1425 A.H., corresponding to
15-20  May 2004 A.D.,  discussed the amendments  suggested by the Shari'ah
Standards Committee  and the Drafting  Committee, and incorporated the amendments  deemed  suitable.  The  Shari'ah  Board  unanimously adopted some  of the  items  of the  Standard  and  some  items were adopted  by the majority  vote of the  members  of the  Shari'ah  Board,  as recorded  in the minutes  of the meetings  of the Shari'ah  Board.






501





Sharr'ah  Standard  Na (18):  Possession (Qabd)





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Realisation  of Possession in the Shari'ah
■  The basis  for the realisation of actual  possession with  respect to gold, silver  and  currencies  through  actual physical possession  is   the sound tradition  reported  from Ubadah  Ibn  Al-Samit  (may Allah be pleased with him),  that the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him),  said,  "Gold for gold,  silver for silver..." till he said,  "like for like,  equal for equal, from hand to hand.  If these species differ,  then sell as you like as long as it  is from hand  to hand".
■  The basis  for acknowledging custom (Urf)  as the basis  for the realisation of possession   is the consensus (Ijma)  of the Jurists  (Fuqaha).It  is  in this regard that  Al-Khatib  Al-Shirbini  says:  "The reason  is  that the Law• giver has used  the term  possession in an unqualified  sense  and  has deemed  it  the basis  of rules.  He did  not elaborate  it, and  there  is  no definition  for it in the language.  It is  for this reason that recourse is  to be  had to custom (Urf)".Ibn Taymiyyah  said, "As long as there is  no definition  for it in the language or in the Shari'.ah,  recourse must be had to the custom of the people,  like  possession mentioned  in the words of: the Prophet  (peace be upon him): He who  buys food is  not to  sell  it until he takes possession  of it?9 AL-Khattabi says:  "Forms of possession differ for things in accordance with a difference in their own forms and in accordance with the varying practices of the people  with respect to
them."(9
The  basis for the  realisation  of possession  in  immoveable  property through   relinquishment  is  customary  practice.  The  opinion  of the

(2)  Related   by Muslim  in his "Sahih.
(3)  "Maughni AL-Muhtaj" [2:  72].
(4)  Majm Al-Fatawa" by  Ibn  Taymiyyah  [3: 272] (5)  "Maalim AI-Sunan Li AL-Khattabr",  [3:  136].



502





Sharr'ah  Standard  Na (18):  Possession (Qabd)

majority  of the  jurists  among   the  Hanafis,  Malikis,  Shafi'is,  Hanba• lis and  Zahiris,  as well  as others  besides  them,   is that  possession  in immoveable  property  is delivered  through  relinquishment  and  the facilitating of transactions in it." Hanafi jurists  have stipulated that  if a lock  is placed  on  the  immoveable property,   then,  it is sufficient  for the  delivery of possession  to  deliver  the  key along  with  relinquish• ment  so as to provide  the  facility  to the possessor to open  it without difficulty.
The basis for considering  registration of immoveable property as construc•
tive  possession  in the case of mortgage  (Rahn)  is  custom  and its practice (in  countries  that  have adopted  the  system  of registration  of property) whereby  registration   of mortgage  of immovable  property   by  entry  in a page ct the register ct mortgages  is  deemed  delivery of possession  un• der the law  (constructive  possession)  and it acts as a substitute  for actual
delivery  of possession  with  respect  to  its legal  effects  and  results.  'This applies even if the property  has in it  the household  assets of the tenant  or is  attached  to the rights of the lessor  over this property,  because in such a case too they are considered  possession  constructively  and in fact.
• Add to this  the fact that official mortgage grants to the creditor  (mortgagee)
a personal  right over the mortgaged  property, which gives him, as a result ct the death  of the owner or his insolvency. a right  prior to all the credi• tors for the satisfaction  of his claim from this property.
Possession  of Ascertained  Moveable  Property
a  The basis  for the realisation of possession in ascertained moveable  proper• ty, as well  as liabilities by description, through  relinquishment  in favour of one entitled  to it and in a manner that enables him to deliver it without any

(6)  "Al-Fatawa  A!Hindiyyah"  [3:   16];  "Radd  AI-Muhtar"  [4:  561],  passim;  "Rawdat AI• Talibin" [3:  515];  41Majmw Sharh Al-Muhadhdhab"  [9:  276];  "Mawahib AI-Jalil" [4: 477]; "KashshafAl-Qina" [3: 202];  AI-Mughnt [4:  333]  A41-Muhalla" [8: 89]; see article (263)  in "Majallat Al-Ahkam Al-'Adliyyah"; article (435)  in "Murshid AlHayran; and article (335) in Majallat Al-Ahkam Al-Shar'iyyah  'Ala Madhhab Al-Imam Ahmad.
(7)  "Radd AI-Muhtar"  [4:  561];  "AI-Fatawa  Al-Hindiyyah"  [3:  16];  see articles (270)  and
(271)  in "Majallat Al-Ahkam Al-Adliyya'; and articles (435)  and (436)  in Murshid AL•
Hayrar.
(8)  41-Madkhal A!- Fiqhi Al-'Amm  Lil-Zarqa"  [1:  278]  and [2: 648]  marginal note.
(9)  A1-Mudhakkirah Al-Idahiyyah Li Al-Qanun AI-Madani AL-Kuwayti", (P.  339) as quoted
by Muhammad Wahid A!-Din Suwar in his boak on Islamic Fiqh, (P  94)



503





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (18):  Possession  (Qabd)

restriction,  whether  or not the moveable  property  needs to be delivered through  one of the customary units of measure, is  that delivery of a thing literally means delivering it completely without any impediments,  so that no one shares it with the possessor, and this is  possible by relinquishment. Further, the person who is  under an obligation to deliver must have a way through  which  he can be discharged of his  obligation, and what is  in his ability is  to relinquish  it and remove all obstacles.  As for actual  physical possession  (by  hand),  it  is  not  within  his  ability  to provide that  for  it  is a voluntary  act  of taking  possession.  If the  obligation  to  make  such  a delivery is   imposed  on him,  it  would  become difficu1t  for him  to meet such  an obligation.'This  rule,  as well as its basis,  has  been supported  by a resolution of the Islamic Fiqh Academy (0IC),
■  The basis  for considering the registration of pledges  (hypothecation)  of mobile  moveable  property   like cars,  steamers,  airplanes  and  trains  in the official  register  for the beneficiary  (in countries  where a system  of registration  has been  adopted  for such  moveable  property)  is   deemed constructive  possession  for what it represents.  I is  the governing custom that considers official registration as the delivery of constructive  posses• sion to the beneficiary and acts as a substitute for actual possession with respect to its  legal  effects  and consequences.
• The  basis  for stipulating  the ascertainment   (setting  aside)  of moveable property  through  customary  units of measure for the realisation of pos• session are the words of the Prophet  (peace  be upon him):  "He who buys
food  (wheat)   is not  to  sell  it until  he has measured  it"? insofar  as  they
indicate  that possession  in this  case  is not attained  except   by the use of
the  cubic  measure.  Thus,  ascertainment  in what  is  estimated  by cubic measure is  through  cubic measure and the remaining  types are  assigned

(10)  Bada'? AI-Sana'tr"  [5:  244]  A!-Fatawa  Al-Hindiyyah  [3:   16];  "Radd Al-Muhtar
(4:  561];  "Sharh AI-Majallah  Li AI-Atast"  [2:  200 and after];  Al-Mughn"  [4:   111];
4If%ah Li-Ibn Hubayrah" (P.  224);  articles  (272) to (275)  of  "Majallat AL-Ahkam Al•
'Adliyyal; and articles  (437) and (438) in Murshid Al-Hayran"
(H) Resolution No. 53 (4/6)  in its 6 Session (Sha'ban  1410  A.H./March  1990  A.D.).
(1I2)  Related  by Muslim in his "Sahth",  [10:  169];  Abu Dawud  in his "Sunan"  [2: 252]  and
AI-Nasa'i in his "Sunan" [7: 285].



504





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (18):  Possession  (Qabd)

a similar rule on the basis of analogy. This  is  the view of the majority of the Jurists  from among the Malikis,  Shafi 'is and Hanbalis upholding that possession  in things that are estimated by cubic measure, weight, linear measure and counting is attained by taking delivery through these measures accompanied by relinquishment.
The basis for considering the delivery of documents pertaining to commodities,  appliances and goods (like bills of lading and warehouse receipts)  as constituting constructive possession of what they represent is  the customary practice in this respect seeking support from the view of the Malikis  that the mode of possession in moveable property that is not subjected to estimation is  recourse to custom (Ur)" Further, the basis  for  stipulating cubic  measure for  the soundness of  possession in food that is estimated by cubic measure in the tradition from the Prophet (peace be upon him)  is the custom that was prevalent during the period of the Prophet (peace be upon him) to the effect that possession in things subjected to  cubic  measure is   through  cubic measure and for the rest analogy is to be employed. As the determination of the issue of possession in contracts is based on custom, therefore, everything that is  taken by custom to be possession in a certain period is to be deemed as possession from the perspective of the Sharf'ah.  If the custom of the people changes in this  respect,  the consideration  of that  mode  as possession  ceases. The reason is  that where the constructive  basis of  rules  is custom,  the rules will  alter with a change in custom,    except for  those things that have been specified   by the Shari'ah.  As fr  as  the custom prevalent in our times is  based upon the consideration of the delivery of documents for moveable commodities and goods -even where these are subjected to estimation- as amounting to possession of these commodities and goods, it will be deemed valid from the perspective of the Shari'ah. The basic principle here is  what is stated by  Al-Wansharisi, "A thing that is  acted upon by the people  and is preferred  by their custom and practice must

(13)  "Maughni AI-Muhtaj" [2:   173];  "Kashshaf Al-Qina" [3:  201];  and Ibn  Qudamah,  "Al
Mughnt" [4:  I11].
(14)   Sharh  AL-Khirashr"  [5:   158];  AI-Dardir,  AlSharh  Al-Kabir  [3:  145];  and  A!-Baj,
A1-Muntaqa" [6:  97].
(15)   A1-Mughn"  [6:   188];  AI-Furuq"  [1:   176];  and  Al-Qarafi,   Al-Jhkam  Fi Tamyiz AL• Fatawa '#n AL-Ahkam", (P.  231).



505





Sharf 'ah  Standar d N (18):  Po ssession (Qabd)

be accommodated through the  Shari'ah even  against disagreement and opposition,  as far as possible"(6
The basis for  considering prior possession of a certain thing as a substitute
for subsequent possession on grounds that are acknowledged  by the  Shari'ah, when it represents it, is that the purpose behind the realisation  of possession is  to establish  control  over, and the ability to undertake transactions in,  the thing possessed. Ifthis state is found possession  is found too. This is based  on what is upheld   by the Malikis  and Hanbalis to the effect that if a person sells a thing, or gives it away as gift or pledges it, while the thing is in the possession  of a usurper, borrower, bailee, hirer, agent or another, then prior possession represents  absolutely subsequent  entitled  possession through the contract, irrespective  of the nature of possession exercised by the possessor being that of liability or trust  and irrespective  of the entitled possession being in the nature of trust or liability.  As for what arises from this  with respect to the possessor being liable for the thing possessed or holding it as a trustee, it has no connection with or effect upon the reality of possession.(
Expenses of Possession
a  The basis for the view that the expenses  of possession of the sold commo• dity are borne by the  seller  is that the delivery  of the  sold commodity is obligatory on the seller  by virtue of the contract, and the contract is  not completed without it;  and a thing without  which an obligation cannot be fulfilled  is also obligatory. Accordingly, this  is what was upheld by the  ma• jority of the Jurists to the effect that meeting the expenses of the delivery of the sold commodity -by presenting it if it is absent and by ascertaining it if it needs to be ascertained by a customary unit of measure- is the  responsi• bility  of the  seller.  The  basis for the view that expenses,  if any,  of taking delivery of  the price are the responsibility  of the  buyer,  is that payment of the price to the seller is  obligatory upon the  buyer,  thus,  it is  binding on him to bear the burden of  all that is  required by such  delivery. The basis for qualifying this rule to impose the expenses on both parties insofar as there

(16)  Al-Wansharisi,  "AIMryar" [6:  471].
(17)   "Mayyarah   'Ala  AI-Thfah"  [I:    IIH];   "Bidayat  AI-Mujtahd"  [2:   229];   Majd  Ibn
Taymiyyah,  "A1-Muharrar",  [I:  374];  Ibn Taymiyyah,  "Nazariyyat Al'Aqd", (P  236) "Kashshaf Al-Qina"  [3:  249 and 373],  [4:  253];  and Al-Qarafi,   "Sharh  Tanqih  A!• Fusu!"  (P. 456).



506





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (18):  Possession  (Qabd)

is no condition  to the contrary, is extended from the ruling of the majority of the Jurists of upholding conditions.  As for the qualification that "there is no custom to the contrary, it is based on the view of the Jurists, insof r as it is stated in their texts that if there is a stipulation or custom to the contrary, then,  it is  binding to follow such  stipulation or custom."
The  basis for  the buyer bearing  the expenses  of constructive  possession
of what  he  has  purchased,  as represented  by  official  registration   and attestation  for the sale of immoveable property  or its mortgage in countries that  have  adopted  a system  of registration   of transfer  of immoveable property.,  as  well as  the  sale  of some  mobile  moveable  property.  like cars,  vehicles,  steamers  and airplanes  or their pledging  (hypothecation) in countries   that  have  adopted  a system  of officially  registering  such things,  and  as  well as the  purchase  of shares  of corporations  -whose trading  is  permissible according to the Shari'ah  in markets  for financial paper-   is   the  customary  practice   in  all  these  things.   Further,   such a practice  secures the interest  of the buyer and  is  supported  by the rule that  gain  is  linked  to  the  bearing  of expenses.  It is  also  supported  by derivation   of the  rule  from  what  has been  stated  by the  Hanafi  Jurists to the effect that the expenses  of the drafting  of documents,  promissory notes and of witnessing, which confirm the transaction of sale,  are to be borne  by  the buyer  as  long as there  is no custom  or stipulation  to the contrary.
• The basis for the seller  bearing  the expenses  for the delivery of the sold commodity  to  the  buyer  with  the  stipulation   of a known  place  (other than  the place of contract  where it is  present)  is  what has been stated  by the Hanafis and the Hanabalis  affirming that such expenses  are borne by the seller in case of a stipulation  to this effect.!

(18)   Al-Zurqan  'la Khalil" [5:   158};  "Hashiyat AL-Dusuqi  [3:  144];  "AI- Bahjh  'Ala Al• Thfal  [2:   144];   A!-Dardir,   "A1-Sharh  Al- Saghir"   [3:   197];   "Al-Maughn"  [6:   188]; "Sharh Muntaha  Al-Iradat"  [2:  192]  "Mughni Al-Muhtaf [2:  73]; "Bada T' AI-Sana1" [5:  243]; Al-Atasi,  Sharh  Al-Majallal"  [2:  221];  articles  (45-242)  in  Majallat  Al• Ahkam 'Ala Madhhab Al-Imam  Ahmad;  articles (288-91)  in "Majallat Al-Ahkam Al•
'Adliyya;  and articles (67-466) in Murshid Al-Hayran".
(19)   "Durar Al-Hukkam"  [3: 230]; "Kashshaf Al-Qina" [3:  180];  "Sharh Muntaha  A-Iradat"
(2:   161];  articles (353),   (446)  in Murshid  AL-Hayran';  article (287)  in  "Majallat  AL• Ahkam Aal-Adliyyah';  and article  (342)  in  Majallat  AI-Ahkam  Al-Shar'iyyah  'la
Madhhab AI-Imam Ahmad".



507





Sharr'ah  Standard  Na (18):  Possession  (Qabd)

Expenses  of Possession  in Qard  (Loan)
The  basis for the borrower bearing the expenses of delivery and acquisition, which  refer to taking of  delivery through  customary  units  of  measure in a contract of Qard,  is  that the lender  has undertaken  a good act,  and costs are not  to  be imposed  on one who does a good  act Linked  to these with respect to the rule  are the expenses of the drawing up of documents, promissory  notes and  so  on,  which are matters  that  are  needed  for the implementation,  execution  or verification of the contract of Qard (loan),  it is the borrower who bears these costs  insofar as these are the requirements or  appendages of raising a loan,  which is  for his  interest.  The  lender  is undertaking an act of  donation of the benefits of his wealth and the person doing good is  not to be made to bear costs over and above his granting of a thing because "No ground (of complaint)  can there be against those who do good!  If it is  made binding on him to bear the costs of lending  and recovery as well as attestation, it would run counter to his good act, and it would lead  to the preventing to those who own wealth from  lending  it.
Expenses of Possession  in Deposit  (Bailment)
The basis  for the depositor  bearing  the costs of  deposit  and recovery in a  contract  of Ida' (deposit)  is  that  "The  burden  of possession  on  each thing  is  binding  upon  the one who benefits from  its  possession,  due to the principle:  Gains are based on the bearing of costs"022  It is  known that  the benefit in deposit  and  its  return  belong to the depositor  alone, thus,  the expenses that are incurred  on its  deposit  and recovery are  bin• ding  upon him.9

Key Modern Applications of Possession
The basis  for  considering  the possession  of a bank  draft or  a personal cheque,  accepted for payment by the drawee, as constructive possession of

(20)  A1Zarqani  'Ala  Khalil  [5:   158];   AI-Dardir,   "A-Sharh  AI-Sa ghir"  [3:   197];   and
"Hashiyat AI-Dusuqi" [3:  144].
(21)  [AITawbah  (Repentance):  91]. (22)  "Durar Al-Hukam"  [2: 333].
(23)  "AI-Bahr  Al-Ra 'ia"  [7:  276];  "Durar  AL-Hukkam"  [2:   272];  "AL-Mughnr  [9.  269]; "Kashshaf AL-Qina" [4:  203]  Asma Al-Matalb" [3:  84];  "Tuhfat Al-Muhtar  [7:  12 4]; A1-Muhalla" [8:  278]; articles (793)  in Majallat Al-Ahkam AI-Adliyya'; and articles
(1340)  in Majallat Al-Ahkam AI-Shar'iyyah  'Ala Madhhab Al-Imam Ahmad".



508





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (18):  Possession  (Qabd)

the amount accepted is customary banking practice and trading transac• tions in this respect.  The confirmation of this is laid down in a resolution of the International Islamic Fiqh Academy.
• The basis for considering  a payment  on a credit card as constructive possession  of the  amount   of repayment  is   banking  practice  in  this respect.  Likewise,  in  the  consideration   of a deposit  by  a person  of an amount in a bank account of the client, irrespective of this being cash, a bank endorsement, or a cheque accepted for payment by the drawee bank, as constructive possession by the beneficiary. This has been confirmed by a resolution of the International  Islamic Fiqh Academy.99




































(24)  Resolution  No.  (53) 4/6 in its 6 Session (Sha'ban  1410  A.H./March  1990  A.D.).
(25)  25 Resolution  No. (53)  4/6)  in its 6 Session.



509





Sharr'ah  Standard  Na  (18):  Possession (Qabd)





Appendix (C)
Definitions


Al-'Aqar  (Immoveable  Property)
It is something that has a permanently affixed foundation  and  it  is not possible to transfer  it or move it,  along with the subsistence  of its  shape  and form,  like land  and houses.

Al-Manqul  (Moveable  Property)
It  is  something that  can be transferred  and  moved.  Thus,  it includes cash, loans, animals, cars, ships, airplanes, trains, things subjected  to cubic measure  or weight.
Bay' Al-Juzaf (Sale by Random Estimate)
It  is the sale  ofi something  whose precise quantity  is  not known,  and  its quantity is  known through  estimation  without  employing a cubic measure, weight,  linear measure,  count.

Al-Qabd Bi-Sifat AI-Daman  (Possession Creating a Liability for Return)

It is  the acquisition of a thing that leads to the liability for the return  ofi the thing,  if it is a fungible commodity,  that is,  its  return  to its  owner as long  as the thing exists,  and its value, if it is  non-fungible, on its  loss or conversion, whatever the cause of this,  and this when it occurs without  the permission of the owner (as  a wrongful  act,  delict, tort),  like the possession by a thief or usurper, or with the permission of the owner, but with the intention of owning it,  like  the possession of one bargaining for it  or one who has expressed the intention  to own it. Some  Jurists  have deemed the possession by the borrower, the mortgagee (pledge),  lessor  and the independent  contractor  to be of this nature.

AI-Qabd  Bi-Sifat Al-Amanah (Possession  Creating  a Trust)

It is  the acquisition ofi a thing that leads to its  treatment  as a trust  in the possession  of the  possessor  insofar  as  he does not  bear the liability of its



510





Sharr'ah  Standard  Na (18):  Possession (Qabd)

loss,  and as long as he has not committed  a tort  or negligence  in its safe• keeping.  This occurs  with  the  permission  of the owner  when  there  is  no intention  to own it rather  it is for the interest  of the owner, like the bailee, agent, dedicated servant, Wali and Wasi, or it is for the interest of the person acquiring  it,  like the tenant, borrower, and mortgagee, or for their common interest,  like the Mudarib, partner,  tenant  and irrigator.

'Urf (Custom)

It  is  what is  practised  by the people and what they have come to follow in terms of words, acts or relinquishment. The 'Urf that is acknowledged  by the Shari'ah  is  the one that meets the following conditions:
1.  That  it  should  not  contradict the  Sharf'ah.  If the  'Urf  goes  against a Shar'iah  Text or one of the principles  of the Shari'ah,  it is a custom that is  void.
2.  That the 'Urf should be continuous or predominantly so.

3. That  the  'Urf  be prevalent  at  the  time  of  the  undertaking  cf the transaction.
4. That  the two parties  to the contract  should  not have expressly stip• ulated  against  it.  If they  express  such  a stipulation the  'Urf  is  not admissible.

























511


























Shariah Standard No. (19)



Loan (Qard)












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page

Pref:ilce...................................................................................................        517
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................       518
1.  Scope   of the Standard..............................................................................       518
2.  Definition ofQard..................................................................................       518
3.  Elements  (Arkan)  of a Loan (Qard)  Contract and Its Conditions...       518
4.  Rules for  Excess Benefit Stipulated in the Qard Contract...................       518
5.  Rules for Excess Benefit Not Stipulated  in the Contract............       519
6  Stipulation  of a Period in Qard...........................................................       519
7.  Stipulation of a Contract in Qard...........................................................       519
8.  Stipulation cf a Reward for Raising Loans  for Another..............       519
9.  Service Charges fJT Qard..........................................................................       520
10.  Key Modern  Applications  of Qard..........................................................       520
11. Date   of Issuance of the Standard.............................................................       522
Adoption of: the  Standard......................................................................       523
Appendices
Appendix (a):   Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard...............       524
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard.....................................       526
Appendix (c):   Definitions..............................................................................       533
















515








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE  ALL-MERCIFUL,  THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household  and all his companions





Preface


This standard aims to elaborate the rules of the Shari'ah for loan (Qard). Among these are the rules for a benefit (Manfa'ah) arising from a loan whether or  not this  is stipulated (in  the contract), just as it includes the regulations of  the  Shari'ah  that  must  be  followed by  Islamic   financial  institutions (Institution/Institutions)."Likewise, the Standard includes the Shari'ah rules
for some applications that the institutions need to implement, like current accounts, perquisites in return for loans, service charges for loans, and mutual overdrafts between the institution and its correspondents.

























(1) The word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer,  in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



517





Shani'ah Standard  No.  (19):  Loan (Qard)





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers loans and the accompanying benefits or costs irrespective  of the institution  being  a lender  or a borrower.

The Standard  does not cover what  is  not a loan  (Qard),  like the price in a credit sale and investment  accounts, because they have standards specific to them.
2. Definition  of Qard

Qard is the transfer of ownership  in fungible wealth to a person  on whom it is binding  to return  wealth similar  to it.
3. Elements (Arkan) of a Loan  (Qard)  Contract and Its Conditions

3/1   The contract of loan  (Qard)  is  concluded through offer and acceptance by the use of the words Qard  and Salaf or any other  word or act that conveys the meaning of Qard.

3/2  The legal capacity for making  a donation is stipulated for the lender.

3/3 The legal capacity to undertake transactions is stipulated  for the borrower.

3/4  It  is stipulated for the subject-matter of the contract  that it be known fungible  (Mithli)  marketable  wealth.

3/4/1  The borrower   comes  to own the  subject-matter of Qard  (the wealth loaned)  through  possession, and he becomes  liable for (the repayment  of) a similar  subject-matter.

3/4/2  The  applicable  rule  is  the return  of an amount  similar  to the loan amount  at the place where it was delivered.

4. Rules for Excess Benefit  Stipulated in the Qard  Contract

4/1   The  stipulation  of an  excess  for  the  lender  in  loan  is prohibited, and it amounts  to Riba,  whether the excess is  in terms  of quality  or



518





Shari'ah  Standard Na (19):  Loan (Qard)

quantity or whether  the  excess is  a tangible thing or a benefit,  and whether  the excess is  stipulated at the time  cf the contract or while determining the period of delay for satisfaction  or during  the period of delay and,  further,  whether the stipulation is in writing or is part of customary practice.

4/2  It is permissible to stipulate  the satisfaction (repayment)  ofQard at a place other  than  that where the loan  was made.
5.Rules for Excess Benefit  Not  Stipulated in the Contract

5/1  It   is   not  permissible  to  the borrower   to  offer  tangible  property   or extend a benefit to the lender during  the period of the Qard when this is  done for the sake of Qard, unless giving of such benefits is  a practice continuing among the parties from a time prior to the contract cf Qard.

5/2 An excess over Qard  is permissible in terms  of quantity or quality, or offering of tangible  property or extending of a benefit,  at the time of satisfaction  when it is not stipulated or is part of custom, irrespective of the subject-matter of Qard  being cash or kind.

6. Stipulation  of a Period in Qard

It is permissible  to stipulate a period  in Qard. The borrower  is, therefore, under  no obligation to return  it prior to the termination of the period  nor can the lender demand  it back prior to the end of the period.  If,  however, no period   is  stipulated,  it  is  binding   upon  the  borrower   to return   its substitute  (Badal) on demand.

7. Stipulation of a Contract  in Qard

It is  not  permissible to stipulate  a contract of Bay'  (exchange,  sale) er
ljarah  or other  commutative  contract within  the contract  of Qard.

8. Stipulation of a Reward for Raising Loans for Another

It is permissible to stipulate a reward  for  raising loans  for  another  as long as it is not a fictional device (Hilah) for dealing in Riha.  [see item 8/3/2 of Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (15) on Ju'alah  at the end cf which  it is stated "with the  condition that the  transactions  are not employed  for raising  interest bearing loans through  stipulations, customary  practice  cc dealings among Institutions"]



519





Shan'ah Standard No (19):  Loan (Qard)

9. Service Charges for Qard

9/1   It is permissible to a lending institution  to charge for services rendered in  loans  equivalent  to  the  actual  amount  directly  spent  on  such services.  It is  not permissible  to the institution  to charge an amount in excess of such a service charge.  All charges in excess  of the actual amount  spent are prohibited,  and it  is  necessary to ensure precision in the determination  of the actual charges so that they do not lead  to an excess that can be deemed a benefit. The fundamental  rule is  that each loan  bears its own specific charges,  unless this  becomes difficult as in the case of a group or common  loan, in which case there is  no restriction  in the way of bearing direct collective charges for all the loans  on the basis of the entire sum.  It  is  necessary that the method cf determining  the charges be laid  down by the Shari'ah  Supervisory
Board of the institution  in detail,  and this  is  to be done by distributing
the expenses incurred  among all the loans  and each loan  is  to bear its share proportionately.. An explanation of such circumstances  is  to be presented before the Board along with suitable documents.

9/2  Indirect  expenses  incurred   in rendering  services for loans are not included   in  actual  expenses,   like  the  salaries  of the  employees, the rentals of space,  assets and  means  of transport  as well  as other management  and general expenses of the institution.
10. Key Modern  Applications of  Qard

Among the most important modern applications of Qard are the following:

10/1  Current accounts

10/ I/ 1The reality of current accounts is that these are loans and not deposits.  Thus,  the  institution  comes  to own  the  amounts and a liability to repay the amount  is established against it.
10/1/2It  is permissible  for the institution  to demand wages for ser•
vices rendered  to the holders of the current  accounts.

10/1/3It is permissible  for the institution to render services related  to deposits and withdrawals to the owners of the current accounts with  or without  compensation  like  chequebooks  and  ATM cards  and the like.  There is  no restriction  on the institution



520





Shari' ah Standard Na (19):  Loan (Qard)

if it  distinguishes  between  owners  of current  accounts  with respect to what relates to deposits and withdrawals, like exclusive  booths  for  receiving  the owners of some accounts, or like distinguishing between the types or cheques.

10/2  Perquisites for Qard

It is not  permitted to the  institution to present  to the  owners  of current  accounts,  in lieu of such accounts,  material  gifts,  financial incentives, services or benefits that are not related to deposits and withdrawals.  Among  these are exemptions from charges in whole or in part, like exemption from  credit card charges, deposit  boxes, transfer charges and letters  of guarantee and credit.

The perquisites and incentives  that are not specific to current accounts are not governed  by this  rule.

10/3  Charges on credit cards  for cash  withdrawals from ATMs

10/3/1 The charges imposed on cards for cash withdrawals from bank teller machines  are a charge for services and are independent of the loan.

10/3/2  It is  necessary  that the charges imposed  on credit cards for cash withdrawals  from bank  teller machines  be  an amount that   is    certain   within   the   limits   of  reasonable   charges excluding  profit  from  Qard.  It  is  not permissible  to link the
charge to the amount  withdrawn.  It is  not permissible to the institution to slice the withdrawals  as a device for obtaining repeated charges just as it is not permissible (for this purpose) to take into account  the period  of repayment  of the amount withdrawn.  Where  there  is   a difference  in currencies,  the application  of the rate for the prevailing currency  is stipulated.
[see  also item  4/5,  Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (2) on Credit  and
Charge Cards I

10/4  Overdrafts between the institution  and its correspondents

In order  to  avoid  interest   between   the  institution  and  its  cor•
respondents,  there  is no  restriction  if the  institution  comes  to



521





Shan'ah Standard  No (19):  Loan (Qard)

an agreement  with other correspondent  banks to place a ceiling upon the overdrafts  of one drawn upon  the  other  without  any claims for profits (interest). [See item 2/4/a of Shari'ah Standard No.  (1) on Trading in Currencies]

I 1. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 30 Rabi' I,  1425 A.H., corresponding to 19
May 2004 A.D.













































522





Shari' ah Standard Na (19):   Loan (Qard)





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Standard on Qard was adopted by the Sharl'ah Board in its meeting No.  (12)  held in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah  during the period of 26-30 Rabi  I,  1425  A.H.,  corresponding  to 15-19  May 2004 A.D.












































523





Shan'ah Standard  No. (19):  Loan (Qard)





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No.  (8) held in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah  during  the period  of 28 Safar to 3 Rabi' I,  1423  A.H.,  corresponding to 6-11  May 2002
A.D.,  the  Shari'ah  Board  decided  to  issue  the  Shari'ah  Standard  on  Qard
(loan).

On  24 Rajab  1423  A.H.,  corresponding  to  1     October  2002 A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Standards Committee  decided to commission  a Shari'ah consultant to prepare an exposure draft on the Shari'ah  Standard  on Loan  (Qard).

In its  meeting No.  (7)  held in the Kingdom of Bahrain  on 16  Muharram
1424 A.H., corresponding to  19 March  2003 A.D., the Shari'ah  Standards Committee   (1)  discussed  the Shari'ah  study  and  required  the  consultant to  incorporate  necessary  amendments   in the light of the  discussions  and observations  of the members.

In  its  meeting  No.  (8)   held  in  the  Kingdom  cf  Bahrain  during  the period  of 16-17  April 2003 A.D., the  Shari'ah  Standards  Committee   (1) discussed the exposure  draft f the standard  on Qard and made necessary
amendments  in the  light  of the  discussions  and  the  observations  of the
members.  The Committee  discussed  the exposure  draft of the standard  in its meeting held on 25 and 26 Rabi' II,  1424  A.H.,  corresponding to 25  and
26 June  2003 A.D.,  and incorporated  necessary amendments in the light of the discussions  and observations  of the members.
The  Committee   discussed  the  exposure  draft  of the standard   in   its meeting  No. (9)  held  it Amman,  the  Hashimite  Kingdom  of Jordan,  on
23  and  24  Jumada  I,   1424  A.H.,  corresponding  to  23  and  24 July  2003
A.D., and made necessary amendments  in the light of the discussions  and observations  of the members.



524





Shari' ah Standard Na (19):   Loan (Qard)

The  revised  exposure  draft  cf the Shari'ah  Standard  was  presented  to the Shari'ah  Board  in its meeting No  (11) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah during   the  period   of  2-8  Ramadan   1424   A.H.,   corresponding   to  27
October-2  November  2003  A.D. The Shari'.ah  Board made amendments to the exposure draft of the standard  and decided that it be sent to specialists and interested parties  in order to obtain their comments  in preparation  for the discussion  of the exposure  draft in a public hearing.

A public hearing was held in the Kingdom of Bahrain  on 29 Dhul-Qadah
1424 A.H., corresponding to 21  January 2004 A.D. The public hearing was attended by more than fifteen participants  representing  central banks, institutions, accounting firms, Shari'ah scholars, academics and others interested  in the field.  The members  of the Shari'.ah  Standards  Committees (1) and (2),  responded  to the written  comments  that were sent prior to the public hearing  as well  as to the oral comments  that were expressed  in the public hearing.

The  Sharf'ah  Standards  Committees   (1)  and  (2)  in a joint  meeting  in the  Kingdom  of Bahrain  on  30  Dhul-Qaldah  1424  A.H.,  corresponding to 22  January  2004  A.D.,  discussed  the comments  that were made during the  public  hearing  as well as the  observations   received  in  writing.  The Committees  made amendments that were deemed  suitable.

The amended  exposure  draft was presented  to the Drafting  Committee in  its  meeting  held  in the  Kingdom  of Bahrain  on  25  Safar  1425  A.H., corresponding  to 15  April 2004 A.D.

The  Shari'ah  Board  in its  meeting  No.  (12)  held  in Al-Madinah  Al• Munawwarah  during the period of 26-30 Rabi' I,   1425  A.H.,  corresponding to 15-20  May 2004 A.D., discussed the amendments  suggested by the Shari'ah Standards Committee and the Drafting Committee, and incorporated the amendments   deemed  suitable.  The  Sharf'ah  Board  unanimously  adopted some of the items of the Standard and some items were adopted by the majority vote of the members of the Shari'ah  Board,  as recorded in the minutes of the meetings cf the Shari'ah  Board.







525





Shani'ah Standard  No (19):  Loan (Qard)





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


■  The basis for stipulating that wealth  given as Qard be known is  to enable the borrower to return  a similar substitute of the wealth of Qard.
■  The basis for the rule that the borrower  does not come to own the wealth lent except through  possession is  that the contract  of Qard is one in which commutative  aspect and that  of donation  stand  combined,  however,  the act cf donation  is predominant.  It is for this  reason that the rule is  similar to that for gift (Hibah)  in which ownership  is  transferred  with the taking of possession.
■  The basis for the rule that the subject-matter  cf Qard be a fungible item  is
that it is  only such an item that can be returned  by the borrower. Further, fungible  items are compensated  through  similar  substitutes  in usurpa• tion and destruction.
The basis for the obligation of returning  the counter-value  of Qard at the
same place where it was granted,  when there is  no contrary  stipulation,  is that this is  the governing rule.
Stipulation  of an Excess in the Counter-V:alue of Qard
The basis for the prohibition  of stipulating an excess in the counter-value of Qard for the lender  are evidences from the Qur 'an, the Sunn ah, consensus of Fuqaha (ljma)  as well  as rational arguments that convey the prohibition of Riba (usury)  in Qard.
Stipulation  of Repayment  in a Land  (Place)  Other  Than  That  of Qard
• The  basis  fer  the  permissibility  of repayment  in  a  land  other  than  that where Qard was granted so as to provide a facility to the borrower whether or not the lender benefits from this, is as follows:
1.     The  reports from   the  Companions,   may Allah  be pleased  with
them,  which  indicate  the permissibility  of stipulating  repayment  in

(2)  41-Musannaf" by Ibn Abu Shaybah [6: 279] and AI-Sunan Al-Kbra" by A!-Bayhaqi,
[5:  352]



526





Shari' ah Standard Na (19):   Loan (Qard)

a land other than that where Qard was made. This is a view upheld  by the Malikis and the Hanbalis  and it was preferred  by Ibn Taymiyyah and Ibn Al-Qayyim  Al-Jawziyyah.
2.    The  stipulation  of repayment in a land  other  than  that  of the  Qard is  in the  interest  of both  the  lender  and  the  borrower without  cau• sing injury  to either  along with the existence  of a need. The Shari'ah does not lay down the prohibition  of interests  that bear no injury.  In fact it lays down  their  permissibility.  It does prohibit those  that  are injurious, but here the benefit  is mutual  and they are cooperating to arrange  this.  It, therefore,  belongs to the category  of cooperation and participation.
3.   The basic rule in transactions (Mu'amalat)  is  permissibility,  and the stipulation   of repayment of a loan  in a land  other  than  that  of the Qard  is  not  expressly  prohibited  by the  texts,  nor  is   the  meaning expressly  stated  in the  texts  so that  prohibition  could  be extended through  analogy.  Thus, the repayment  falls under  the rule of permis• sibility.

Stipulation of a Period in Qard

The  basis  for  the  permissibility  of  stipulating  a  period   in  Qard,   for Qard  can  be delayed  by  stipulating  a period,  are  evidences   about  the permissibility ofa period  ofdelay, the obligation of abiding  by conditions and  contracts,  for the  realisation  of the  purposes  of the  Qard,  and  for
repelling  injury.

Stipulating a Contract of Sale within the Contract of Qard
■  The bases for the prohibition  of stipulating  a contract of sale within  the contract  of. Qard  are the following:
1. The saying of the Prophet  (peace be upon  him):  "A Salaf (loan) and sale   (in one  contract)  are not  permitted   nor  are  two  conditions   in a sale  nor  the profit from  a  thing for which  the  liability for loss  is not borne  nor the sale of what you do not have"

(3)  Related  by Abu Dawud.  The text of this Hadith  belongs to him as narrated from Abdullah
Ibn Amr Ibn Al-'Ass (may Allah be pleased with him), chapter  on the person  who =



527





Shani'ah Standard  No.  (19):  Loan (Qard)

2.    The  underlying   reasoning   is  that  the  word   Salaf  .in   the  words of the  Prophet  (peace  be  upon  him):  "A   Salaf (loan) and sale  (in one  contract)   are  not  permitted,  means  Qard.  The  Hadith   indi• cates  the  impermissibility   of  combining  a  Qard   and   a  sale  in a single contract.  The generality of its meaning  includes  the imper• missibility  of stipulating  a contract  of sale in a contract  of Qard  as
well  as the  impermissibility  of stipulating  a Qard  contract  within a contract  of sale.
3.     The  stipulation   of a contract  of sale  within  a contract  of Qard  is a means towards  obtaining  an excess in Qard  as he may oblige him with respect  to the  price  for the  sake of Qa.rd,  and  in this  way the Qard will be created with a stipulated excess, which is  Riha.  These are means that,  by agreement,  are to be prevented  and blocked.
4.    The stipulation ct a contract of sale within a contract of Qard removes the  contract  of Qard  from  its  main  purpose,  which  is  to  provide a facility. Tbe reason is  that Qard is  not a commutative  contract,  it is rather  a contract  of piety and virtue;  thus,  it  is   not valid  if compen• sation is  stipulated  in it.  If Qard is  linked to a commutative  contract, it will receive a part  in the compensation  and this  will take  it out of its required  purpose.  This  will nullify it and nullify the commutative
contract linked  to it as  well

• The basis for the prohibition  of  a stipulation  by the lender that the borrower gives  him a gift is  that in reality  this  amounts  to Qard with an excess that is  stipulated  for the benefit of the lender  and this excess is  the gift.  Thus,  it amounts to prohibited  Riba and removes the contract from the category of a compassionate  contract moving it to one ofRiba.  Furtber, this stipulation

=   sells what  he does  not have,  "Kitab A!Buy",  (H: 3504): "Suunan Abu Dawud" [3:  283]; Al-Tirmidhi,  chapter  on  the disapproval of selling what  one does not have,  "Kitab AI• Buy" (H:  1234):  "Sunan Al- Trmidhi [3: 526-27] A!-Nasa 'i, chapter on two conditions in a sale,  "Kitab Al-Buy" (H: 4644):  "Sunan AI-Nasa'i" [7:  340];  Ahmad  in "Muusrad AlMukthirin Min AI-Sahabah" (H: 6633):  "Musnad Ahmad"  [2: 3730]  through different channels,  all of them:  From Ayyub,  who  said:  "Amr Ibn  Shu'ayb  related to me  saying,
'My father related to me  from ..'  till he mentioned  Abdullah Ibn Amr reporting  it'. The Hadith  is deemed  hasan  Hadith,  but  rises  to  the level  af  Sahih Li-ghayrihi due to  its numerous channels.



528





Shari' ah Standard  Na (19):   Loan (Qard)

generates a benefit for the lender and the Jurists have unanimously  agreed that any contract that yields a benefit stipulated for the  lender is  imper• missible.  The benefit in this  stipulation   is that the lender  will benefit from a second loan  from the borrower,  and this benefit is not in lieu of anything other than the very Qard that he gave him.
Stipulation  of a Reward for Raising Loans on the Basis of Credit•
Worthiness
The basis for  permitting the stipulation of a reward for  raising loans  on the basis of credit status is  that this  is a counter-value for  a service rende• red, and this is what is  upheld by the Jurists that a reward may be acquired for  recommendations and lending of status.
Charges  for Services Actually Rendered
The basis for the permissibility of the lender charging  only what is equivalent to the actual  costs incurred is  that these are in lieu ct the costs alone.  The lender is doing a favour and the person doing a favour is not to be penalised. The basis  for  the prohibition  of charging in excess  of this  is  that in such a case  it would amount to an  excess  in lieu ct the Qard.  Resolution  No.  13
(1/3) was issued by the International Islamic Fiqh Academy (OIC) regarding
the recovery of  actual  costs.

Material Benefits at the Time of Repayment That Are Not Stipulated
• The basis for  the permissibility of giving an excess,  in terms of quantity or quality,  at the time of repayment by way of generosity and goodwill, when these are neither stipulated nor is there a practice of paying them, is  the Hadith  reported from Abu Rafi, may Allah be pleased   with  him, that the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him)  borrowed a very young camel from a man and then wished to present to him one of the camels of the Sadaqah (Zakat),  so he asked Abu Rafi' to repay the man his camel. Abu Rafi' returned it  to him and said,  '1  do not find anything  there ex• cept a full grown four year old camel."  The Prophet (peace be upon him) said,  "Give  him  this  camel.  The  best people  are those  who  do  better  in of
repayment"." It is  reported from Abu Hurayrah that a man  came  to the

(4)  Related  by Muslim   inhis Sahih" in the Book of "Musaqat", chapter on the person who borrows  may return  what  is better.



529





Shani'ah Standard  No (19):  Loan (Qard)

Messenger  of Allah (peace  be upon  him)  seeking  alms.  The  Messenger of Allah  (peace  be upon  him)  borrowed  food  amounting to one-half  of a Wasq  and  gave the  man  this.  When  the  lender  came  demanding his loan,  he gave him a full Wasq saying,  "One-half of this  is your repayment
and the other half is  a present from  me.°

Material Benefits Not Stipulated  Prior to Repayment
The basis for the prohibition of material benefits  not stipulated prior  to repayment,  unless  these  benefits  are not  for the  sake of Qard  or  in lieu thereof,  are the following:
1.    From  Anas  Ibn  Malik,  may  Allah  be pleased  with  him,  who  said:
"The  Messenger  of Allah  (peace be upon  him)  said,  'When one of you grants  a Qard  and  a gift is  made  to  him  by the borrower or  he offers him a free ride on his animal, he is not to accept this from him, unless such a practice was prevalent among them prior to the Qard"8
2.    Reports  of precedents  laid down  by the Companions, may Allah be pleased  with  them,  which  indicate the  prohibition  of accepting  the gift of the  borrower  and  other  types  of benefits,  unless  there  is  an evidence  that this is  not for the sake of the loan, and that the  lender responds  with a similar  gift or adjusts  it as repayment of the debt.

Current Accounts
a  'The  basis  for the  determination  that  current  accounts   constitute  loans
(Qurud), are the following:
I.  That the bank comes to own the deposits in the current accounts and has the right to undertake transactions  in the amounts and to seek growth in them (through  investment).  Further,  it  is under an obligation to return a similar amount  on demand.  This is  the very meaning  of Qard, which is  the giving of wealth to one who benefits from it -that  is,  employs it and consumes  it  in pursuit  of his aims- and then  returns  its  counter• value.  This differs  from Wadi'ah  (deposit)  in  the terminology  of Fiqh, which is wealth deposited with a person for safe-custody so that he does not employ the wealth and returns this very wealth to the owner.

(5)  Related  by A!-Bayhaqi,  4l-Sunan  Al-Kubra",  [5:  351]. (6)  Related   by Ibn  Majah in his Sunan" (H:  2457).



530





Shari' ah Standard Na (19):  Loan  (Qard)

2.    It is  binding  on the bank to return  a similar amount  on demand  for the current  deposit,  and it guarantees  such return  even upon  loss  of the wealth, whether  or not it was negligent. This is the purpose  of the contract  of Qard,  as  against  Wadi'ah  in Fiqh terminology insofar  as the Wadi'ah  is  a trust  in the possession  of the custodian,  thus,  if it is destroyed  due to his transgression  or negligence,  he is  held liable for it, but if it is destroyed  without  such transgression or negligence, he is not liable. Resolution  No. 86 (3/9) was issued by the International Is• lamic Fiqh Academy  (OIC)  regarding the status of current  accounts.
The  basis for  the permissibility of the bank  demanding service  charges
-for maintaining current  accounts- for the services rendered, is an excess over the duty owed by it,  because  it  is  entitled  to such charges  in lieu ct the acts undertaken by it and services rendered  to the dient.
■ The basis for the permissibility ct the owner of a current  account  utilising
a chequebook and ATM card without  compensation are the following:
1.     The additional benefit  arising  out  of this  issue  is  common  for both parties -the  lender and the borrower-  as both  benefit  from  it,  thus, both benefits  are set off against  each other.  In fact, the  benefit  that goes to the client through  the issuance of a chequebook and an ATM card is secondary  and is  not a primary  benefit insofar as the bank has set up this system for serving  its own numerous aims  and objectives, thus,  the benefit  accruing  to the bank from this system  is a primary
benefit,  while the  realisation  of the  benefit  for  the  client  from  this
system  is  a consequence  of the  employment  of this  system  by the
bank for  its aims and objectives.
2.    The benefit  derived  by the owner  of a current  account  -the lender• from  this  system  without  a counter-value  is  not  a benefit  separate from  the Qard.  In fact, it is  a means  for the satisfaction of the loans acquired  by the bank insofar as  these  are  ways for the repayment  of loans for every lender  as when he demands  them.
■  The  basis  for the prohibition  of presents and gifts,  when the underlying cause  is  Qard,  insofar  as the bank gives these  presents and  gifts to one who gives it a Qard, is  that these  are by way of gifts to the lender prior to



531





Shan'ah Standard  No (19):  Loan (Qard)

the satisfaction of the loan when these are due to the Qard.As for the basis of presents and  gifts in general, they are not related to Qard and there is no suspicion about them
Overdrafts between the Institutions and Their Correspondents
The basis  for the permissibility of overdrafts between institutions  and their correspondents  is  general need and that the benefit derived from this practice is not specific to the lender alone.  In fact,  the benefit is mu• tual.  Further, it does not fill under the category of Qard rather it is a step for transacting  with one who deals with you.  'Thus, the issue does not resemble the case of "You give me a loan and I will give you a loan.\
































(7)  Resolution No. (355) of the Shari'ah  Board of Al Rajhi Banking Corporation  was issued
with respect  to presents and gifts in lieu of loans (Qurud).
(8)  4l-Mughn"  by   Ibn  Qudamah,  [6:  436];  Resolutions  and  Recommendations  of Al
Baraka,  No.  (8/10)  and (11/6);  Sharl'ah  Rulings on economic  Matters,  issued  by  Bayt
AI-Tamwil  AL-Kuwayti,  [1:   178].



532





Shari' ah Standard Na (19):  Loan (Qard)





Appendix (C)
Definitions


Benefit  Arising from  Qard
It is  a benefit  or an interest  that is  derived  by the lender  in a contract of
Qard  due to this contract. Current Accounts
These are loans  that constitute  the current accounts  insofar  as the bank
comes  to own  these  amounts   and  it  is  possible  for  the  owner  of these accounts  to withdraw  these amounts at any time he likes.

Mithlis  (Fungibles)

These are cash, things subjected  to cubic measure, weight, linear measure and very similar  countable  things  that  do not differ to an extent that their difference  will lead to a difference  in their value.

Qimis  (Non-Fungibles)
These  are types  of wealth  whose  difference,  one from  another,  leads  to
a difference  in their value,  as in the case of animals. Legal Capacity for Donation
It is  the  ability  of the  subject  (Mukallaf)   to grant  wealth  or a benefit
to another in  the  present   or in the  future  without compensation  in lieu thereof and with the usual  intention  of piety and  the doing  of good.

Legal Capacity to Undertake Transactions

It is  the ability of a person  to commit  an act or to issue  a statement   in a manner that is acknowledged by the Shari'ah, and the underlying basis is discretion,  reason  and puberty.

Deficient Legal Capacity for Execution
It is the ability ct a person to undertake  certain transactions  and not others
so that the execution of such transactions depends upon ratification by another.



533























Shari'ah Standard No.  (20)



Sale of Commodities in
Organized Markets












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        540
I.  Scope of the Standard ............so.sos.sos.sos.sso.sos.so.sos.sos.so........      540
2.  Definition of International Sales and lheir Kinds...............................        540
3.  Shari'ah  Basis for International Commodity Sales..............................        541

4.  Key Applications cf International Commodity Sales                 ,......       543
5.  Derivatives.................................................................................................        546
6.  Date of Issuance of the Standard.............................................................        548
Adoption  of the Standard......................................................................        549
Appendices
Appendix  (a):   Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard..............        550
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard.....................................        552


























537








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all his companions





Preface


This  Standard  aims to elaborate  the foundations  on which international commodity  sales,  between parties from different countries, are based whether the  contracts  have been  concluded   for  spot  or  deferred  commodities  or through  derivatives (futures, options, indexes and swaps). The Standard also explains what is permissible out of these according to the Shari'ah and what is not, along with an explanation of the Shari'ah substitutes for them within the Islamic financial  institutions  (Institution/Institutions)."


























(1) The  word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including  Islamic Banks.



539





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (20):  Sale  of Commodities  in Organized  Markets





Statement of the Standard


1.  Scope of the Standard

This Standard  covers  international  sales contracts  whose subject-matter are  commodities   and  to derivatives  of various  kinds:  Swaps,  Indexes, Futures and Options.

The Standard  does not cover financial and commercial  paper or currencies, because these have their own specific  standards, just  as it does not cover sales that are concluded outside the organized markets.
2. Definition  of International  Sales and Their Kinds

2/1  Definition  of international commodity  sales

2/1/1  International  commodity  sales are contracts  that are concluded in organized  commodity  markets  under  the  supervision  of specialised Organizations and through  intermediaries who coordinate  the  demand   for  sales  and  the  demand   for  pur• chases by employing  standard  contracts  that  contain  various conditions   and  specifications  along  with  a statement   of the period  and  place of delivery:.  The contract may also stipulate the  deposit  of a portion  of the  price as a security for the  ex• ecution  of the  contract and  opening  of an account  with  the intermediary.
2/2 Types of international  commodity  sales

International  commodity  sales are divided into  three types:

2/2/1   Spot  contracts

These are contracts  that require immediate  delivery and accep•
tance  of delivery,  however,  delivery, and  possession  may take place within the limit  of a day or two  days in  accordance with the regulations of the market.



540





Sharf'ah Standard  No  (20):  Sale of Commodities  in Organized Markets

2/2/2   Forward  contracts

These are contracts in which both counter-values are deferred with  the legal effects of the contracts taking  place at a deter• mined  future  date,  and  delivery  and possession take place at that time.

2/2/3   Futures  commodity contracts

These are contracts whose legal effects take place at a determined future  date  either  through  liquidation  between  the  parties,  or cash settlement  or through   counter-contracts,  but  they  rarely end in actual delivery and possession.

2/3  Termination of international  commodity  sales

International  commodity sales end in one of the following ways:

2/3/1   Contracts in which actual delivery takes place for both counter•
values or in one of them;

2/3/2   Contracts that end through  the operation of liquidation between the two parties;

2/3/3   Contracts  that end in cash settlement by agreement;  and

2/3/4  Contracts  that end in counter-contracts.

3. Shari'ah  Basis for International  Commodity Sales

3/1   Spot contracts

Conclusion of spot contracts in the commodity markets  is permitted with the following conditions:
3/1/1   That  the commodity sold  must  be in existence  and owned  by
the seller;

3/1/2   That the commodity sold must be ascertained in a manner  that distinguishes  it from  others;

The documents that establish  the existence  of the commodity, its  ownership  and distinguish  it from others are sufficient proof of the realisation of the two previous  conditions.



541





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (20):  Sale of Commodities  in Organized Markets

3/1/3   That the contract should not include a condition  that prevents the  buyer  from  taking  delivery  of the  commodity   sold  and obliges him to accept a set-off for value;

3/1/4   That  the price be paid on a spot basis.  Delay,  without the stip• ulation of delay, in the delivery of an existing and ascertained commodity, or delay in the acceptance of spot price, does not affect the validity of the contract.

3/2  Forward contracts (both  counter-values delayed)

3/2/1   These are the selling and buying ct commodities  with the stip• ulation of delivery in the near future.  They differ from futures transactions  insofar as  they are  not organized  in an exchange and  they  are  instruments   of hedging  that  do  not  submit  to fi nancial  supervision.

3/2/2  There  are two  forms  for contracts with both  counter-values delayed:

3/2/2/1 That the commodity  is a liability through description, while the price is  def erred,  irrespective of the contract being concluded  with the word  sale  or with the word Salam. These contracts are not permitted, because they amount  to  a Salam  contract  in  which  the  capital  ct Salam  (Ras al-Mal) is not paid promptly.  [see Shari'ah Standard  No.  (10)  on Salam  and Parallel  Salam]

3/2/2/2 That the commodity  is  ascertained, but a delay. in its delivery. is  stipulated  along with a delay. in the price. Such  contracts  are not permitted.

3/2/3   When  the contract  is  that  of Istisna'a,  such  a contract  is  valid even when the price is delayed.   [see  Shari'ah  Standard  Na (11) on Istisna'a  and Parallel  Istisna'a,  item  3/1/5]

3/2/4  There  is  no restriction  in delaying one of the  counter-values: the  price,  while observing  Accounting  Standard  No.  (20)  on Deferred Sale; and the commodity sold, while observing Shari'ah
Standard  No.  (I0) on Salam  and Parallel  Salam.



542





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (20):  Sale  of Commodities  in Organized  Markets

3/3  Futures  transactions in commodities

It is not permitted  to undertake  futures transactions  according  to the Sharf'ah, either  through their formation  or by trading in them.  [see items  2/2/3,  5/1]

4. Key Applications of International Commodity Sales

4/1  Permissible  applications of international commodity sales:

4/1/1   Appointing another  person  as an agent  for  the  purchase of a commodity  at a spot price,  and the sale of the commodity  by the agent to a third person  for a def zrred  price on behalf of the principal  along with  the  determination  of compensation   for the agent as part  amount or percentage  of the purchase  price of the commodity.  These are the operations  of the "Investment Agency"

4/1/2  Appointing   another  person  for the  management   af purchase operations  with a spot price  and sale on a deferred  basis with the  manager  being  entitled  lo  a known  undivided   share  in the profit. These are "Mudarabah" operations. [see Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (13)  on Mudarabah]

4/1/3   The agent  undertaking -after the purchase  of the commodity on  account  of the  principal-   to buy  it for  himself  from  the principal  with  the  stipulation   of distinguishing   between  the liability of the  agent and the  liability of the  principal  for the commodity  and this by  ensuring  two independent offers and acceptances between the principal  and the agent. It is  possible that this be accomplished  through  the exchange of two advices, one  for  notifying   ownership   by  means  of agency  and  the proposal  of purchase  (offer),  and the other  for  agreement  to sell (acceptance).  [see Sharf'ah  Standard No.  (8) on Murabahah (appendices  A and B)]

4/1/4   Purchase by the institution of a commodity on a spot basis and the subsequent  sale of this  commodity  by the institution  to another on a deferred payment basis.  In this application the avoidance of



543





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (20):  Sale of Commodities  in Organized  Markets

buy-back is  stipulated,  like the buyer selling what he purchased with a deferred  price  to one from whom it  was  initially bought on a spot basis at a price lesser  than this (deferred  price).

4/2  International  commodity sales prohibited by the Shari'ah

4/2/1   Transactions  in commodities  that are not permissible.

4/2/2   Sale  of the purchased commodity  prior to its  ascertainment  in a manner  that  distinguishes  the  commodity sold from  other commodities  leading to the overlapping  of the liability of the buyer  and  the  liability  of the  seller due to  the  mixing  up of what is owned by the buyer with what remains with the seller.
4/2/3   Purchase  by  the  agent  of a commodity   for  the  institution's account and its  sale thereafter  to himself without  the exchange of two  advices  of offer  and  acceptance  between  the  agent• buyer and the institution  that owns the commodity so that the liability of the principal  (seller) and  the  liability of the  agent selling the commodity to himself come to overlap.

4/2/4   Sale by the agent of the purchased  commodity before actually or legally taking  delivery. Legal  delivery  includes  the  transfer of liability to the buyer (agent) by ascertaining  the commodity in a manner  that  distinguishes  it  from  things  other  than  the
commodity  sold.

4/2/5  Commodity purchase operations of the  institution   through agency and purchase thereafter by the agent for his own account on a def2rred  basis by confining  the transaction  to an offer by the  agent  to the  institution  to enter  into the  transaction   and
acceptance by the institution  thereof prior to taking possession of the commodity  by the institution  or without the exchange of the two advices of offer and acceptance.

4/2/6   Purchase  of a commodity   by an institution  on the  basis of a spot price  and  thereafter  its  sale to the  (same)  institution  it• self on a  deferred  basis,  or its  sale to a  holding  institution  of the seller institution  with complete  or majority  ownership,  or



544





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (20):  Sale of Commodities  in Organized  Markets

with effective control, amounts  to a buy-back  ('Inah)  sale. [see Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (8)  on  Murabahah   and  item  2/2/4  of Shari'ah  Standard  No. (11) on Istisna'a  and Parallel Istisna'a]
4/2/7  Sale   by an agent  of a commodity  for his  client,  prior  to the transfer  of ownership  to him through  purchase, to an institu• tion that  is  his principal.

4/2/8  Sale  of ascertained   specified commodity, without  its passing into the ownership  of the seller,  through  fictitious  documents or the sale of the same commodity  at the same time  to more than one institution dealing with the commodity.  It is necessary to be precise  about  the numbers  of the title documents of the commodity  along  with  the  fixing  of liability  for the  person causing a discrepancy.

4/2/9   The lack of detail about  compensation  for agency (brokerage) and merging  it  with  the determined  purchase price, which  is stated  as an  amount  that  includes  it.  The  substitute  for this is  the mentioning of the compensation  and then  deducting it from the inclusive price, or the addition  of the compensation to the purchase  price or the determination of the sale price with the specification that what is  in excess is  the compensation  of the agent.

4/2/10 A statement  within  the  general  memorandum of agency. for purchase  and sale of commodities that denies  the right of the buyer (principal)  to take delivery of the commodity.

4/2/1  1    The institution making the payment of the purchase price of the commodity  contingent  upon  the agent providing  a guarantee for the  payment  of the  sale price  by the  agent  himself  or by another  person.

4/2/12  Stipulation of a guarantee  by the seller for the sale price under all circumstances.  He is obliged to provide  a guarantee  in  case of tort,  negligence  or breach  of the provisions  of agency  like the  stipulation  that  he obtain  sureties  from  the buyers  of the



545





Sharf'ah Standard  No  (20):  Sale of Commodities  in Organized Markets

commodities with respect  to the deferred  period.  [see  Shari'ah
Standard  No.  (5)  on Guarantees]

5.Derivatives

Derivatives have a large number of kinds,  the most  important of which are: Futures, Options, Indexes and Swaps. The Shari'ah rule for derivatives is based on the rule for the contracts employed  within  their  framework, as stated  in paragraphs that follow:

5/1   Futures

5/1/1   A contract   that  is  binding  under  law.  It is   concluded   on  the trading   floor  of the  exchange  for  the  sale  and  purchase   of commodities or financial instruments for a period  linked to the near  future.  The transaction is  arranged  with the mentioning of the quantity,  type and category  along with the statement of the  date  and  place of delivery.  As for the  price,  it is  the  sole element  that varies,  and it is ascertained in the trading  hall.

5/1/2   The Shari'ah  rule for futures  contracts

It is  not permitted  according to the Shari'ah to undertake  futures contracts either through  their formation  or trading.  [see para. 4]

5/2  Options

5/2/1   A contract   by means  of which  a right  is  bestowed  -but  not an obligation-   for  the  purchase  or  sale of an  identified  item (like   shares,   commodities,   currencies,   indexes   or debts)   at a etermined  price  and for  a determined period.  There  is   no obligation   in  this  contract   except  on  the  person  selling  this right.

5/2/2  The Sharf'ah  rule for options

Options indicated  above are not permitted  neither  with respect
to their formation nor trading.

5/2/3   Shari'ah  substitutes for options



546





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (20):  Sale of Commodities  in Organized  Markets

5/2/3/1  The conclusion  of a contract  pertaining to ascertained assets is permitted according to the Shari'ah, along with the  payment  of part  of the  price  as 'Arboun  (Earnest Money)  with  the  stipulation   that  the  buyer  has  the right  to revoke the contract within  a specified  period in lieu of the  entitlement  of the seller to the  amount of earnest  money  in case the buyer exercises his right of revocation.  It is  not  permitted to  trade  the  right established  with respect to the earnest  money.

5/2/3/2   The conclusion  of a contract  for commodities in them• selves along with the stipulation of an option  for estab• lishing  the  right  of revocation  for  one  of the parties, or for both, during  a known  period. This option  is  not eligible  for trading.

5/2/3/3    The issuance of a binding promise by the owner af assets to sell them,  or a binding  promise  by  one desiring  to buy them,  without  specifying  a counter-value  for  the
promise. This promise is  not eligible for trading.

5/3 Swaps

5/3/1   Swaps are agreements between  two parties for the temporary exchange  ct determined  financial   assets,  material   assets  or interest rates. In some cases the sale of a commodity or deferred currency takes place without  the transaction resulting  in any exchange of the commodity, while in other cases there may be an option,  in  return  for  a counter-value,  that  gives the owner the right to execute or not to execute the contract.

5/3/2   The Sharf'ah  rule for  swaps

Swaps are not permitted  in the forms in which they are practised

in commodity  exchanges.



547





Sharf'ah Standard  No  (20):  Sale  of Commodities  in Organized Markets

6. Date of Issuance  of the Standard

This Standard  was issued  on 30 Rabi' I,  1425  A.H.,  corresponding to 20
May 2004 A.D.




















































548





Sharf'ah  Standard  No.  (20):  Sale  of Commodities  in Organized Markets





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Standard on International  Commodity  Sales in Organized Markets  was adopted by the Shari'ah  Board  in its  meeting  No.  (12)  held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah during the period of26-30 Rab  I,  1425
A.H., corresponding  to 15-20 May 2004 A.D.











































549





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (20):  Sale of Commodities  in Organized Markets





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (8) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah  during the period of 28 Safar to 3 Rab;' I,  1423 A.H., corresponding  to 11-16 May 2002
A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Board decided  to  issue  the Standard  on International
Commodity  Sales in Organized Markets.

On 25  Rajab  1423  A.H.,  corresponding  to  2  October  2002  A.D.,  the Shari'ah Standards Committee decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare an exposure draft on international commodity sales in organized markets.

The  Shari'ah   Standards   Committee   (2)   in  its   meeting  held  in  the
Kingdom of Bahrain  on  13  Safar  1424  A.H.,  corresponding  to  15  April
2003  A.D.,  discussed  the juristic  study  and required  the consultant  to incorporate  necessary amendments  in the light of the discussion and the observations of the members.  The Committee also discussed the exposure draft in its meeting held on Monday 23 Rabi' II, 1424 A.H., corresponding to 23  June 2003 A.D, and made necessary amendments  in the light of the discussion and the observations  of the members.

The revised exposure draft of the standard was  presented to the Shari'ah Board in its  11th meeting held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah during the period of 2-8 Ramadan 1424 A.H., corresponding to 27 October - 2 November 2003
A.D.  The Sharfah  Board  made amendments to the exposure draft of  the
standard  and decided that it be sent to specialists and interested  parties in order to obtain their comments in preparation for its discussion in a public hearing.

A public hearing was held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 29 Dhul-Qa'dah
1424 A.H., corresponding  to 21  January 2004 A.D. The public hearing was



550





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (20):  Sale  of Commodities  in Organized  Markets

attended   by more  than  fifteen  participants   representing  central  banks, institutions, accounting firms, Sharf'ah scholars, academics and others interested  in the field.  The members  of the Sharf ah Standards  Committees (1) and (2),  responded  to the written comments  that were sent prior  to the public  hearing  as well as to the oral comments  that were expressed  in the public hearing.

The Shari'ah  Standards  Committees  (1)  and (2)  in a joint  meeting in the
Kingdom  of Bahrain  on 30  Dhul-Qadah  1424  A.H.,  corresponding to 22
January 2004 A.D., discussed the comments that were made during the public hearing as well as the observations received in writing. The Committees made amendments  that were deemed suitable.

The amended  exposure  draft was presented  to the Drafting  Committee in its  meeting  held  in the  Kingdom  of Bahrain  on  25  Safar  1425  A.H., corresponding to  15  April 2004 A.D.

The Shari'ah  Board  in its  meeting No.  (12)  held  in Al-Madinah  Al-Mu•
nawwarah  during  the period  of26-30  Rab?'  I,  1425  A.H.,,  corresponding to
15-20 May 2004 A.D., discussed the amendments suggested by the Sharf'ah Standards Committee  and the Drafting  Committee, and incorporated the amendments deemed  suitable.  The  Shari'ah  Board  unanimously adopted some  of the  items  of the  standard  and  some  items were  adopted  by the majority  vote of the  members  of the Shari'ah  Board,  as recorded  in the minutes  of the meetings  of the Shari'ah  Board.





















551





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (20):  Sale  of Commodities  in Organized  Markets





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


■  The  basis for  the  permissibility  of international  sales transactions  that fulfil the  required  Sharfah  elements  and  conditions  of the  validity  of sales is  their  inclusion  within  the  fold  of the sale  with  respect to which the  Words  of Allah,  the Exalted, were laid  down:  {".Where Allah has permitted trading..'},as well as His Words:  {"..Eat not up your property among yourselves unjustly  except it be a trade amongst you,  by mutual consent.."}. 'The  implementation  of the  international  conventions  on sales or the implementation  of the laws  of some countries  does not re• quire prohibition  of these sales if they do not contain what conflicts with
the rules and principles of the Shari'ah,  and this  is due to the Words of Al•
lah  the Exalted:  {"O you  who believe! fifil (your)  obligations.?'}, with the proviso  "except what legalizes the prohibited and prohibits   what  is le• gal",  due to the words of the Prophet (peace be upon him):  "Muslims shall abide by their conditions, except for a condition that legalises the prohibited or prohibits the lawfl".69
•  The basis  for the prohibition  of delaying of both counter-values is  that in this there is  the creation  ct two liabilities,  along with  what the jurists  have mentioned  with  respect  to the impermissibility of delaying the capital of Salam.  Further, there is  opposition  to the  conditions  required  by the contract. The basis for the conditions of spot contracts  in the commodity

(2)  [A1-Bqarah  (The Cow):  275].
(3)  [Al-Nisa'  (Women):  29].
(4)  [A1-Ma 'idah (The Table):  1].
(5)  This Hadith has been narrated  by  a number of Companions.  It  has been related by Ahmad [: 312]; Ibn Majah with a hasan  chain af transmission  [2:  784], Mustafa A!-Babi Al-Halabi edition,  Cairo {1372  A.H./1952A.D.);  Al-Hakim (Hyderabad,  India edition,
1355 A.H.); A!Bayhaqi  [6:  70,  156],  [10:  133], Hyderabad, India edition, 1355 A.H.); Al• Daraqutni [4:  228],  [3:  77],  Dar A!-Mahasin Lil-Tiba'ah,  Cairo (1372  A.H./1952 A.D.).



552





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (20):  Sale  af Commodities  in Organized  Markets

markets  is that  these are  general conditions  of sale and are permitted according to the Sharf'ah.
The basis for the permissibility of contracts in which one of the counter•
values is  deferred is the validity of Bay Mlaijal and Salam.
The  basis for  the permissibility  of forms of transactions  mentioned  in the Standard related to international  commodity  sales is  that  they are concluded in accordance with the principles of Wakalah (agency), sale with a def rred period, Murabahah sale, and all these are valid contracts
• The basis for  the obligation of issuing an offer by the agent for seeking a sale on his own account and its acceptance by the principal as a seller is  the distinction between the liability of the seller (the principal)  and the liability of the buyer (the agent).
• The basis  for  the obligation of specifying  the wages of the agent, and not merging it with the price is  the Hadith: "He who  hires a hired worker must make known  to him his wages"!This rule of the contract of ljarah is applicable to agency for wages.
• The basis for  the prohibition  of stipulating the lack  of delivery in com•
modity sales is that this negates the requirements  of sale, which  are the transf zr of ownership to the buyer and his right to undertake transactions in the sold commodity.
The basis for prohibiting the stipulation of a guarantee by the agent is that the agent is  a trustee and does not provide a guarantee except for cases of transgression, negligence or going against the constraints of agency.
The bases for  the prohibition  of def rred  transactions in currencies are the Hadiths  prescribing the obligation of possession  in their sale.  'This has received support from a resolution of the International  Islamic Fiah Academy emphasising this•
The basis  for the prohibition  of derivatives  is  that  these are  binding promises  that are converted  to sale contracts  pertaining  to the future without an offer and acceptance. The Shari'ah substitutes mentioned  in the Standard for derivatives are stated in a resolution of the International
Islamic Fiqh Academy."

(6)  Related    by  Ibn  Majah  in his "Sunan"  [2:  817];  See also Majma' Al-Zawa 'id  by  Al• Haythami [4:  98],  Dar Al-Rayyan  Lil-Turath  and Dar  A!Kitab Al'Arabi.
(7) The  International  Islamic  Fiqh  Academy Resolution  No.  (63)  1/7.
(8) The  International  Islamic  Fiqh  Academy Resolution  No.  (63)  1/7.



553





Sharf'ah  Standard  No,  (20):  Sale of Commodities  in Organized Markets

The  basis for  the  impermissibility  of options  is  that  the  subject-matter Of the contract  in them  is  not  wealth that  can be deemed  compensation according  to the Sharr'ah."
'The  basis for  the  impermissibility  of swaps  is  that  no  actual exchange  of
counter-values  takes place thereby.  Such  swaps, as well,  usually constitutes interest payment,  'Inah,  and deferment of one of the counter-values.











































(9) The  International Islamic Fiqh Academy Resolution No.  (63)  1/7.



554





















Shari'ah  Standard No.  (21)



Financial  Paper
(Shares and Bonds)












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page

Pref ace    "fii .. i i,i,ji,i•i•--···..•·i<i  i           ,.i       i11l'I  ••,,i                        ,."-, .. ii 1-. ••.,. ••.• --;;;                                          , .. ,       i·•••·••·i"ii   i·i11illi·i•·<i•·ti••·•·           ,...                            559
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        560
I.  Scope of the Standard ...........so. so.s o s.s o.so .s o.so. s o.so s . s o... .....          56
2.  Rules for Issuance cf Shares................................................................       560
3.  Rules for Dealing in Shares  ..     ...•.....                                                 562
4.  Rules for Issuance of Bonds .......sos.ss.so s»sos»s os»s ssss«so s« sos«s os»s os.s ass.                     567
5.  Ihe  Rule for Trading in Bonds...........so..so.so.sos.so.ooooo.so.so.....        568
6. Shari'ah  Substitute for Bonds..................................................................    568

7.  Date of Issuance cl the Standard............................................................        568
Adoption  rt the Standard......................................................................        569
Appendices
Appendix  (a)  Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard...........        570
Appendix  (b):  The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard....................................         572
Appendix  (c):  Definitions..............................................................................        580























557








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE  ALL-MERCIFUL,  THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings  and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard  aims to elaborate  the rules for  the shares  of corporations just as it  seeks to explain  the rules for  interest-bearing bonds.








































559





Sharr'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)





Statement of the Standard


1.  Scope of the Standard

This Standard  covers shares with respect to their issuance and flotation including  investment, trading,  renting, loaning,  pledging  and  Salam  in them, along with the rule for concluding  futures, options  and swapping contracts  on the basis of shares.

The  Standard  also  covers  issuance  of and  trading   in  interest-bearing bonds.  The Standard  does not cover investment  Sukuk  for which there is a separate specific standard.
2.  Rules for  Issuance  of Shares

2/1  The  issuance  of shares   is  permissible if the objectives for which the corporation was established   are permissible according to  the Sharf'ah, thus,  the objectives of its  formation  should  not be transactions  that are prohibited,  like the manufacturing  of liquor,  trading  in swine  or transactions in Riba. Ifthe objectives of the corporation are impermissible, the formation af the corporation is  permissible too,  and consequentially so is the issuance of shares that constitute  such a corporation.

2/2  It  is permissible  to add a determined percentage  to the value of  the share  at the time  of subscription  to cover the expenses  of issuance as long as this percentage is fixed and determined to be a reasonable amount.  [see item 4/1/2/2 ofShari'ah Standard  No. (12) on Sharikah (Musharakah)  and Modern  Corporations]
2/3  It  is  permissible   to  issue  new  shares  for  increasing  the  capital  of a corporation  if such shares are issued at a price that  is  equivalent to the value of the old shares, which  is  worked out through expert valuation  of the assets of the corporation or on the basis of the mar• ket-value whether  this is at a premium  or at a discount  with respect to the price of the issue.  [see  item  4/1/2/3  of Shari'ah  Standard  No. (12)  on Sharikah  (Musharakah)  and Modern  Corporations]



560





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

2/4  It  is permissible  to underwrite the issue when  this is  done  without compensation  in lieu of underwriting. This is an agreement, at the time of the formation of the corporation,  with someone who undertakes  to purchase the entire issue of shares, or a part thereof  It is an undertaking from  the person  bound  to subscribe  at the nominal  value to all that remains and has not been subscribed  to by  another  It  is  permissible to acquire compensation  for work, like the preparation  of  feasibility studies  or  the  marketing  of shares,  irrespective  of the  work being undertaken  by the underwriter or someone  if such compensation  is not in lieu of a guarantee.  [see  item  4/1/2/4 of Shari'ah Standard No (12) on Sharikah  (Musharakah)  and Modern  Corporations]

2/5  It is   permissible  to split  the  value  of the  share into  instalments  at the  time  cf subscription  so that  one instalment  is  paid  and  the re• maining  instalments  are  def zrred.  The subscriber  will be  considered a participant  to the extent of what he has paid up  and will be bound to pay his additional capital in the company, and this  on the condition that the instalments apply to all the shares and that the liability of cor• poration remains restricted to the value of the shares subscribed  to. [see item 4/1/2/5  of Sharf'ah  Standard No.  (12)  on Sharikah  (Musharakah)
and Modern  Corporations I

2/6  It  is   not  permissible   to  issue  preference  shares  that  have  special financial features leading to the granting of priority  to these shares at the time of liquidation  or the distribution of profits. It is permitted to grant  certain  shares features related to procedural or administration matters,  in  addition  to  the rights  attached  to ordinary   shares,  like voting  rights.   [see  item  4/1/2/14  of Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (12)  on
Sharikah  (Musharakah)  and Modern  Corporations]

2/7 It is  not  permissible  to issue  Tamattu' shares.  These  are shares  that grant the participant compensation  in lieu of his shares, whose value is  redeemed  during the existence  of the company,  and he is granted
Tamattw' shares  that  grant  him  rights  that  are available  for  shares
based  cm   capital,   except  the  right  to  profits  and  the  distribution
of assets at  the  time of winding  up, insofar  as the Tamattw' shares



561





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na  (21): Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

are entitled  to  profit  lesser than  that  given to the  owner  of shares based on capital, just as the owner of Tamatt' shares does not have a share in the assets of the company  at the time of winding  up until the  owners  of shares  based  on capital have  been granted  the value of their  shares.  [see  item  4/1/2/15  of Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (12)  on Sharikah  (Musharakah)  and Modern  Corporations]
2/8 The share certificate - or what stands in its place -is  a document  that is deemed evidence of ownership of the shareholder  for his undivided share in the assets of the company.  It is permitted  that this  document be in the name of the owner,  to his order,  or for the bearer.

3. Rules for  Dealing  in Shares

3/1   A share represents an undivided  share in the capital of a corporation, just  as it  represents  an undivided  share in its assets and  the  rights associated with it upon conversion  of the capital into tangible things, benefits,  debts and so on. The subject-matter of the contract  at the time of trading  of shares is this undivided  share.

3/2  It  is  permissible  to  buy  and  sell shares  of corporations,  on  a spot or def zrred  basis in which delay is  permissible,  if the activity of the corporation   is  permissible  irrespective  of its being  an  investment (that  is,  the  share  is   acquired  with  the  aim  of profiting  from  it) or dealing  in it (that  is,  with  the  intention  of benefiting  from  the difference in prices).
3/3  Participation  or trading  in shares for purposes  of conversion

Participation  or trading is permitted for purposes of conversion for one who has the ability to effect conversion by  adopting a resolution for

(1)  See the Shari'ah basis for  the standard,  item  (18),  for the permissibility of trading in shares  of corporations  whose assets represent  tangible  things  and profits  along with debts and cash that are in excess of the tangible assets and profits with the stipulation that such tangible and cash assets should  not be less than one-third. The reason is that the debts and cash can be properly considered as secondary  to them. (This explanatory note  is intended to complete  the text  of the  Standard  for implementing  subsequent amending procedures, God willing).



562





Sharr'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

conversion in accordance  with the Shari'ah at the first general meeting or by  striving  for  conversion  in  line with  item  3/4/6.  [see  Shari'ah Standard Na.  (6) on Conversion of a Conventional Bank into an Islamic Bank]

3/4  Participation   or trading (for  investment  and trading)  in the  shares of corporations  whose primary  activity is  permissible,  but they make deposits or borrow  on the basis of interest

The fundamental  rule is that of prohibition  of acquiring shares of and transactions   (investment  and trading)  in the shares af corporations that sometimes  undertake  transactions  in Riba and other prohibited things  even  when  their  primary   activity  is   permissible,  but  from this  rule subscription   and  transactions   (investment or trading)  are exempted  with the following conditions:

3/4/1  That  the  corporation   does  not  state  in its memorandum  of association  that one ct its objectives is to deal in interest,  or in prohibited  goods or materials like pork (swine) and the like.

3/4/2 That the collective amount  raised as loan  on interest - whether long-term  or short-term   debt  --  does not  exceed  30%  of the market capitalization of the corporation, knowingly that raising loans on interest is  prohibited  whatsoever the amount  is.

3/4/3 That  the  total  amount   of  interest-taking deposits,  whether short-, medium-   or long-term, shall not  exceed  30%  of  the market  capitalization  of  total  equity,  knowingly that  interest• taking deposits are prohibited whatsoever the collective amount is.

3/4/4  That   the   amount    of   income   generated    from   prohibit• ed  component  does  not  exceed  5%  of  the  total  income  of the  corporation  irrespective   of the  income  being  generat• ed  by  undertaking  a  prohibited  activity,   by ownership   of a prohibited asset or in some other way.  If a source of income is  not  properly  disclosed  then  more  effort  is  to be exerted for identification  thereof  giving due care and caution  in this
respect.



563





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

3/4/5  For the determination of these percentages,  recourse  is  to be
had to the last  budget or verified financial  position.

3/4/6 It is obligatory to eliminate prohibited income specific to the share  that is  mixed up with the earnings  of the corporations, and this in accordance with the following:

3/4/6/1 The elimination  of prohibited  income is  obligatory on one who is  the owner of the share,  whether an investor or a trader,  at the end of the financial  period,  even if the payment is  due at the time of issuance  of the final financial  statements  whether  quarterly,  annual  or  for other period.  Accordingly,  elimination is not obligatory for  one  who  sells   the  shares  before  the end  of the fi nancial  period.
3/4/6/2 The subject-matter  of elimination  is  the prohibited  in• come specific to the share  whether  or not the profits have been distributed  and whether Or not the corpora• tion has declared a profit or suffered a loss.

3/4/6/3  Elimination is not obligatory for the intermediary, agent or manager out of part of their  commission or wages, because this is their right in lieu of the work they have undertaken.

3/4/6/4The  figure,  whose  elimination  is  obligatory  on  the person  dealing in shares, is  arrived at by dividing  the total  prohibited  income  of  the  corporation   whose shares  are traded  by the number  of shares of the cor• poration, thus, the figure specific to each share is obtained.  Thereafter   the  result  is  multiplied   by the number  of shares  owned  by the  dealer  - individual, institution,  fund or another  - and the result  is what is to be eliminated  as an obligation.
3/4/6/5 It is not permissible  to utilise  the prohibited  component
in  any way whatsoever  nor  is  any legal  fiction  to be



564





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

created to do so even  if this is  through  the payment of
taxes.

3/4/6/6The  responsibility  for elimination   of the  prohibited component  of the income,  for  the benefit of all, falls upon the institution in case it is  trading  for itself or in case it is  managing the operations.  In the case of inter• mediation, however,  it is  bound  to inform  the person dealing in them of the mechanism  for the elimination of the prohibited  component  so that he can undertake it  himself.  'The institution   may  offer  these  services, with or without  a charge, for those dealers who desire them.

3/4/7 The institution  will apply the above rules whether  it does so directly  or through  another  and whether  it is  trading for itself or for another  by way of intermediation  or management  of wealth,  like funds,  or is  doing so  as the agent of another.

3/4/8  It is  necessary  to observe these  rules throughout   the period of participation  or trading.  If the rules cannot be applied,  it is obligatory to give  up such  investment.

3/5  It is  not permissible  to purchase  shares by raising  interest-bearing loans through  a broker  or another  (margin  sales), just  as it  is  not permitted  to mortgage the shares for such  a loan.  [see item  4/1/2/6 of
Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (12)  on Sharikah  (Musharakah)  and Modern
Corporations]

3/6  It is not permissible to sell  shares that the seller does not own (short sale),  and the promise  of a broker to lend these at the time of delivery is of no consequence.  [see  item 4/1/2/7  of Shari'ah  Standard  No. (12) on Sharikah  (Musharakah)  and Modern  Corporations]

3/7  It is permissible  to the buyer of a share to undertake  transactions  in it by way  ct sale to another  and the like after the completion  of the formalities of the sale and the transfer of liability to him even though the final settlement  in his favour has not been made.



565





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

3/8  Tb secure lawful  interests,  it is permissible  to specialised official agen• cies to organize trading in some shares so that it cannot be undertaken except through  specialised brokers or those licensed to undertake  the activity.  [see  item  4/1/2/8 of Sharf'ah  Standard No.  (12)  on Sharikah (Musharakah)  and Modern Corporations]

3/9  It is not  permissible to lend shares  of corporations.

3/10 It is  permissible  to mortgage  shares that  are lawful according  to the Shari'ah,  and in this respect there is  no difference whether  the assets of the corporation  are cash, tangible assets or debts or they are a com• bination of cash,  tangible assets and debts and irrespective of one type being predominant in them. This is  to be done in conformity with the conditions  for selling shares at the time of liquidation.

3/11 The contract of Salam  is not  permissible in shares.

3/12It  is  not  permissible   to conclude  futures  contracts   for shares.  [see item  5/1  of Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (20)  on the Sale of Commodities in Organized  Markets]

3/13 It  is  not permissible  to conclude  contracts  of options  for  shares.  [see item 5/2  of Shari'ah Standard No.  (20)  on the Sale  of Commodities  in Organized  Markets]

3/14 It is not permitted to conclude  swap contracts with respect  to shares and their  returns.

3/15 It is not permissible  to rent shares, whether  this is  for pledging them or for the purpose  af  selling the rented  shares,  and returning shares similar  to them,  as is  done  in  the  stock-markets,  or for acquiring their  profits or for  showing a stronger  financial  position  of the hirer or for  another  reason.
3/161t  is  permitted to  lend  shares  by way of Tarah  for the  purpose   of pledging  them  or  for  the  purpose   of granting their  profit  to  the borrower as is done  in  stock markets.  The borrower does  not have the right  to sell the shares  except  for the execution  of the  terms  of the mortgage.



566





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

3/ 17 It is not permissible to undertake trading in the shares  of a corpora• tion, when  the assets of the corporation are cash exclusively, whether this  is  during the period  of  subscription or after  that,  prior  to  the commencement of  the  business   of  the  company. or at the  time  of liquidation, except  at their  nominal value and with the condition of delivery  of possession.

3/18  It is not permissible to undertake trading  in the shares of a corporation if the entire  assets of the corporation are composed of debts,  unless the rules for dealing  in debts are observed.

3/19  If the assets af a corporation  are composed  of tangible assets,  benefits, cash and debts, the rule for trading  in the shares of such a corporation will differ according  to the  primary asset,  which  conforms  to the objective  of the corporation and  its usual  activity.  If its purpose and activity pertain  to trading  in tangible assets, benefits and rights, trading in its shares is permissible  without  taking into account  the rules of Sarf or transactions in debts, with the condition that the total market value of assets,  benefits  and rights  should  not be less  than 30% of the total assets value of the corporation including all assets, benefits, rights and cash liquidity  (the  corporation's  debts,  current  accounts  with others, and  bonds  it holds  which  constitute  debts)  irrespective   of their  size as in such a case these are secondary. If,  however, the objective  of the corporation and its usual activity is dealing in gold, silver or currencies (Sirafah),  it is  obligatory  to undertake trading in its shares  in the light
of the rules of Sarf.

3/20 It is stipulated for the implementation of what is laid down in paragraph
3/18  that  it shall  not be adopted  as  a means  for bargains  in debts and trading  in them  by merging  parts  cf. tangible  assets and benefits  with the debts as  a legal device  for transaction in debts.

4. Rules  for  Issuance of Bonds

The issuance of all kinds of bonds  is prohibited when  these bonds  include stipulations for the return  of the amount of loan and  excess in  any form, whether such excess is paid at the time of the satisfaction of the principal amount of loan,  is  paid  in  monthly or yearly.  instalments  or in another



567





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

manner and whether this excess represents a percentage  of the value of the bond,  as in the case with most types of bonds,  or a part of it, as is the case with zero-coupon  bonds. Likewise, prize bonds are also prohibited.  This applies irrespective of the bonds  being private,  public or governmental.

5. The Rule for Trading  in Bonds

Trading  in bonds, both  sale and purchase, is  prohibited  and so is their pledging and endorsement and so on.
6. Shari'ah  Substitute  for Bonds

The  Shari'ah  substitute  for bonds  are  investment  Sukuk.  [ see Shari'ah
Standard  No.  (17)  on Investment  Sukuk]

7. Date of Issuance  of the Standard

This Standard  was  issued  on 30 Rabi' I,  1425  A.H.,  corresponding  to 20
May 2004 A.D.


































568





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)





Adoption of the Standard


The  Shari'ah  standard   on  Financial   Paper  (Shares  and  Bonds)  was adopted  by the Sharf'ah  Board  in its  meeting  No.  (12)  held at Al-Madinah AI-Munawwarah   from  26-30 Rabi' I,  1425  A.H.,  corresponding to  15-20
May 2004 A.D.











































569





Sharr'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. (7) held at Makkah Al-Mukarramah from  9-13  Ramadan   1422  A.H.,  corresponding  to  24-28  November  2001
A.D.,  decided  to issue  the Shari'ah  standard on financial  paper  (Shares  and
Bonds).

On 25 Rajah  1423  A.H.,  corresponding to  2 October   2002 A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Standards  Committee  decided to commission  a Shari'ah  consultant for the preparation ct an exposure draft on the Shari'ah Standard on Financial Paper (Shares  and Bonds).

In meeting  No.  (6) of the Shari'ah  Standards  Committee (2) held  from
14-15  Muharram 1424  A.H.,  corresponding to 17-18  March  2003 A.D.,  in the Kingdom  ct Bahrain,  the  Committee discussed  the Shari'ah  standard and required  the consultant  to incorporate  necessary  amendments in the light of the discussion  and observations of the members.

In meeting  No.  (7) of the Shari'ah  Standards  Committee  ( l)  held from
14-15  Safar  1424  A.H.,  corresponding  to  16-17  April 2003  A.D., in  the Kingdom   of  Bahrain,   the  Committee  discussed   the  exposure   draft  ct the  Shari'ah  Standard  on  Financial  Paper  (Shares and  Bonds)  and  made necessary   amendments,  just   as  the  Committee   discussed   the  exposure
draft  ct the  Standard  in  its meeting held  from  25-26  Rabi'  II, 1424  AH.,
corresponding to 25-26 June 2003 A.D., and made  necessary  amendments in the light of the discussion  and observations of the members.

In its meeting No. (9) held from 23-24 Jumada 1, 1424 AH, corresponding to 23-24 July 2003 A.D., at Amman,  the Hashimite  Kingdom  of Jordan,  the Committee  discussed the exposure draft of' the Standard and made necessary amendments  in the light ct the discussion  and observations of the members.



570





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

The revised exposure  draft of the Shari'.ah standard  was presented to the Shari'ah  Board  in its meeting No.  (11) held  in Makkah  Al-Mukarramah from 2-8 Ramadan  1424 A.H.,  corresponding to 27 October  -2  November
2003 A.D.  The  Shari'ah  Board made  further  amendments to the exposure
draft of the standard, and decided  that it be sent to specialists and interested parties  in order  to obtain their  comments  in preparation for the discussion of the standard  in a public hearing.

A public hearing was held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 29 Dhul-Qadah
1424  A.H.,  corresponding  to  21  January  2004  A.D.  The  public  hearing was attended  by more than SO participants representing central banks, institutions,   accounting  firms,   Shari'ah   scholars,   academics   and  others
interested  in the field.  The members  of the Shari'ah  Standards Committees (1) and (2),  responded  to the written  comments  that were sent prior to the public  hearing  as well  as to the oral comments  that  were expressed  in the public hearing.

The  Shari'ah  Standards  Committees  (1)  and  (2)  in a joint  meeting  in the  Kingdom   of Bahrain  on  30 Dhul-Qaldah   1424  A.H.,  corresponding to 22  January  2004 A.D,  discussed  the comments  that were made  during the  public  hearing  as well as the  observations   received  in  writing.  The Committees made amendments that were deemed  suitable.

The amended  exposure  draft was presented  to the Drafting  Committee in  its  meeting  held  in the  Kingdom  of Bahrain  on  25  Safar  1425  A.H., corresponding to 15  April 2004 A.D.

The  Shari'ah  Board  in  its meeting  No.  (12)  held  at  AI-Madinah   Al• Munawwarah during the period  26-30 Rabi' I, 1425 A.H., corresponding to
15-20  May 2004 A.D.,  discussed  the amendments suggested by the Shari'.ah
Standards Committee and the Drafting  Committee, and incorporated the amendments deemed  suitable.  The Shari'ah Board  unanimously adopted some  of the  items  of the  standard   and  some  items were adopted   by the majority  vote  of the  members   of the  Shari'ah  Board,  as recorded  in  the minutes  of the meetings  of the Shari'ah  Board.






571





Sharf 'ah  Stan dard  No  (21):  Finan cial Paper (Shares  and Bonds)





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Issuance of Shares
• The basis for the  permissibility  of the issuance  of shares,  when the objec• tives for which the corporation  has been established are permissible, is  the basis  for  the permissibility  of the corporation   (Sharikat  al-Musahamah), which is the  generality of the evidences conveying the obligation of abiding by contracts and conditions, the generality of the evidences conveying the permissibility of partnership, and the generality of the evidences conveying the permissibility  of 'Inan,  Mudarabah,  Musaqat and  Muzara'ah.  'Inan  is the basis for the permissibility of  participation by two or more persons with their  wealth and  labour,  just  as Mudarabah,  Musaqat  and  Muzara'ah  are
the basis for the permissibility of participation  with wealth from one side and labour  from the other side whether  the  subject-matter  of the contract is  cash, as in the case of Mudarabah, or is tangible assets that are developed with work on these assets, as in the case of Musaqat and Muzara'ah.  The evidences for all these forms are well known.
• The  basis  for  the permissibility  of underwriting   the  issue  without  com• pensation  is   that   it  is   an  undertaking  that  does   not  have  a  coun• ter-value,   which  is  the  taking  of  compensation  for  it.   In  this  regard a resolution  of the International  Islamic Fiqh Academy has been issued. The basis for  the impermissibility  of the issuance  of pref rence  shares,  that is,  in other than the prescribed  manner,  is  that this leads  to the severance of participation   in  profit  and  the  imposition   of injustice  on  the other shareholders.
■  The  basis  for the  impermissibility  of issuing  Tamattw' shares   is  that  the
owners of these shares claim their rights to profit and their redemption  is

(2)  International Islamic  Fiqh  Academy Resolution No.  63  (1/7)  on Financial Markets. (3)  International Islamic Fiah  Academy Resolution No. 63  (1/7)  on Financial  Markets.



572





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

only in form as they continue  to be owners of these share and are entitled
to rights at the time of liquidation.
The  basis for  the permissibility  of share being in a person's  name, at his order, or for bearer is that the Lawgiver wishes to establish rights through writing  and  other  forms,  but He has not  determined  a particular   form for this.  If in the  case of corporations- this  takes  place through  the  is• suance  of shares  on  which  names  of the shareholders  are  written  then this  is  valid.  Likewise,  if this  is  undertaken  by recording  the  names  of the shareholders  in special registers,  or indexes,  or in any other  way, or even if the names are not recorded  at all -neither on the certificates  nor elsewhere- then this  is permissible.
Trading  in Shares
• The basis for  the permissibility  of the sale and purchase  of shares of cor• porations, when the activity of the corporation  is  permissible, is that the shares are owned  by the shareholder, and  he has the  right to undertake transactions   in  them  as  he desires  whether  this  is  by way of sale,  gift or another  way, especially when  each one of the  shareholders  has been granted  permission  to undertake  such transactions   through  their  parti• cipation in the memorandum of the corporation  and by subscribing to it. The  basis  for  the  permissibility  of participation  by  one  who  has  the ability  to  convert   or  makes   an  effort   to  convert   insofar   as  that   is
a means  to alter the rejected  and belongs to the category  of al-Amr Bil• Mdruf Wa al-Nahy  'An al-Munkar (enjoining good and forbidding  evil),
which  is  an  act  approved  by  acknowledged   evidences.   In  this  regard a jurstic  opinion  (Fatwa)  has been  issued by the Third  Seminar  on  Fi• nancial  Markets.9
The  basis  for  exempting  trading   in  the  shares  of these  corporations, whose primary  activity is permissible, however, they deposit amounts and borrow  on the basis of interest,  is  the application  of the rule  of removal of hardship  and acknowledging  of general need, widespread  practice,  the acknowledged principles of surplus,  shortage and predominance,"as  well

(4) Held  in the Kingdom of Bahrain  during Jumada  I,   1412  A.H.,  corresponding to
November  1991  A.D.
(5)  A1-Furuq" by  AI-Qarafi  [4:  104];  41-Muwafaqat"  [I:  37];  Ahkam AI-Qur 'an" by  Ibn
Al-Arabi  [4:  1804];  and "Qawa'id Al-Ahkam F Masalih Al-Anam" [1:   18, 4145].



573





Sharr'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial  Paper (Shares and Bonds)

as the permissibility  of dealing with one the major part  of whose wealth is   permissible,"along  with  reliance  upon  the  issue  of  separation   of bargains according to some Jurists.   This is  upheld by most fatwa issuing organisations as well as the Shari'ah Supervisory Boards of Islamic banks.@" The basis of the impermissibility of buying shares  by raising interest-bearing loans from  the broker or someone else,  is  the indulgence in interest and securing this  through  mortgage, and these are activities prohibited  by  the Texts  along with a curse for those who charge Riba,  pay it,  write it down and witness it.
The basis for the impermissibility  of the sale of shares that the seller does
not own is  that this leads to the sale of something  that is not within  the liability ct the seller nor  in his ownership,  and this  is  prohibited  accor• ding to the Shari'ah.
■  The  basis  for the  permissibility   of undertaking  transactions  in  shares even though  the final registration  formalities  have not been completed  is the transfer ofi the liability for loss  (Daman) to the buyer.  This is  attained through constructive  possession  that is  granted  through  the transacting in what he has purchased.
• The basis for the impermissibility of lending the shares of corporations is
that the share at the time of repayment-in  consideration  of what it repre• sents-does  not represent  the same thing that it did  at the time of lending due to the constant  change in the assets of the corporation.
The basis  for the permissibility  of mortgaging  the shares  of corporations
is  the  established  principle that  a thing  can  be mortgaged  if its  sale is permissible.  As the sale of shares is  permitted,  mortgaging  them  is also permitted.  The reason  is  that the purpose  of a mortgage  is  the securing of a loan and recovering  it  through  the sale price of the asset mortgaged in case recovery is  not possible from the debtor. This is  what is achieved through  the mortgaging  of shares and is,  therefore, permitted.

(6)  Bada '? AI-Sana r" [4:  104];  41Ashbah  Wa ANaza 'ir by  Ibn  Nujaym (pp.  112-114);
41Byan  Wa Al-Tahsil"  [18:  194-95],  and AL-Manthur F AL-Qawa'id" [2:  335]
(7)  "Fath al-Qadir  [6:  89-90];  "lqd Al-Jawahir AL-Thaminah" [3:  439];  "AI-Sharh AI-Kabir
Mala Al-Dusuqi [3:  15];  AI-Rawdal [3: 420-25];  and "Majmw A1-Fatawa" [29:  48]
(8)  Among  these is Al Rajhi Organization in its  resolution  No. 48,  23/8/1422  A.H.



574





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

The  basis  for the  impermissibility  of Salam  in  shares  is that  the  sub• ject-matter  of Salam  is   a debt  and  not  an  ascertained   thing,  while  in shares of corporations nothing  works except ascertainment. This is  done by  mentioning the  name  of the  corporation   whose  shares  are  desired through   Salam  thereby  rendering   the  shares  an  ascertained   thing  and not a liability for a debt. Shares  cannot,  therefore,  essentially be the sub• ject-matter of the contract  of Salam.  Further,  Salam  in shares implies the sale f ascertained  things that are not owned and this is  not permitted.  In addition  to this,  the constant  availability of specified shares in the market and the ability of the buyer  to  deliver them  at the end  of the period  is something  that cannot  be guaranteed.
■  The  impermissibility  of concluding  futures  contracts  for shares  is that
these  contracts  imply the  stipulation  of delay in the  delivery  of an as• certained   sold commodity,  that  is,  shares,  and  this prohibited   and  not permitted.  Likewise,  the  delay in the  price  and the  priced  commodity, for this is the sale of a debt for a debt, which is prohibited  by agreement. Further, the seller -mostly-  does not own the shares for which the futures contract  has been  concluded  and  is,  therefore,  selling something  that  is
owned  by another.  This  is  something  over which  there  is  no disagree•
ment  among  the  scholars  as  to  its  impermissibility.  It is  also  included primarily  in the  meaning  of the  Shari'ah  Texts established  By  Prophet Muhammad  (peace  be upon  him)  that  convey  the  prohibition   of the sale of something  that one does not possess.  Again,  most of the futures contracts  are completed  through  a cash settlement  between  the parties, and this is  brazen  gambling  if this  is stipulated  within  the contract.  If it is  not stipulated  in  the contract,  it is  still one type of gambling.  Thereaf• ter, the  purpose  of contracts  is  the  delivery  of possession,  while  in fu• tures  contracts  delivery of possession  is  not the primary  purpose  of the
contracting parties.  These  contracts,  thus,  create an obligation  for,  and
engage the liability of, each party  for a debt that  is  of  no benefit,  except by way of  Mukhatarah and  for waiting  for a loss that will inevitably be incurred  by one party.
• The  basis for the  impermissibility of concluding options  contracts for
shares  is the  right  of option-  which  is  the  subject-matter  of options



575





Sharf'ah  Standard  Na (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

contracts transacted in financial  markets- is not  included  in rights  that can be sold.  The reason  is that  this right  is not  established at all for the seller as it is created through the contract and  after its  creation it  is not related  to  wealth  rather  it  is related  to  an  abstract   thing,  that  is,  sale and  purchase.  If established rights  cannot   be sold  when  these  do not relate  to wealth,  like the  right  of pre-emption,  the  right  to custody of children, the right of Qisas, then, rights  -like the right of option- cannot be permitted in the first  instance.  Added  to this is the fact that  dealing in options contracts is based  on Gharar,  and  Gharar  is prohibited, just like dealing  in options contracts is based  upon  gambling and games  of chance,  equally for the buyer  and the seller of a right to an option,  and this occurs  in cases that  terminate in a cash settlement between  the two parties.  The  contract for  an option falls under  the  sale by a person  of something that  he does  not  own  when  he writes  an option  to buy,  for
he does  not  own the shares  or commodities that  he undertakes to sell;
and  the  sale of what one  does  not  own is  prohibited  according  to  the
Shari'ah.
a  The basis for the  impermissibility  of  concluding  swap contracts  for the dividends  of shares is that these contracts include Riba in both its forms  if the contracts involve the same currency, or Riba al-Nasi 'h alone if it invol• ves two different currencies;  the sale of a debt for  a debt as it is a contract in which both counter-values are def 2rred;  Gharar  due to the uncertainty
about  the amount  of the cash at  the time of the contract; gambling, as the purpose  of these contracts is the acquisition  of the difference between the two average returns  on  the shares and it is  not the delivery of possession, which  is  the purpose  of contracts,  thus, one of the parties  gains and the other inevitably loses,  and this is  truly gambling.  Each one of these prohi• bitions  alone  is  sufficient  to  prohibit  this  type  of contracts,  then  what about all of them  collectively?
• The basis for the permissibility  of trading  in shares or corporations, which
include cash assets and debts, without  regard for the rules of Sarf and dea• ling in debts, even when such debts are more than one-half, is that in such circumstances such assets are deemed  secondary, and in secondary  things matters  that  are not  normally  overlooked  otherwise  are overlooked.  If, however,  the  tangible  assets and  benefits  are less  than  a third,  it  is  not



576





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

permitted  to deal in the shares,  except by observing  the rules of Sarf or transactions  in debts,  because  in such  a case the assets and  benefits  are meagre  and here debts and  cash cannot  be deemed  secondary  to them, and they are the primary  objective of the contract,  thus, those conditions are to be stipulated  for them  that would be applied to them  if they were desired separately.
The basis for the permissibility of trading in shares of corporations  whose assets include debts and cash, when the objective and activity of the corpo• ration is  dealing in things and benefits, without  regard for the percentage of debts and cash, is as  follows:
1.  The Hadith  of Ibn Umar (may  Allah be pleased with him)  stating:  ~ ..
When  a person  buys a slave,  who has wealth,  then  the wealth  is for the
seller,  unless  the buyer  stipulates  this  too"The  Hadith  is  explicit on the permissibility of the sale without  regard for the genus of the price. The general meaning of the Arabic term "Mai in the Hadith includes all  his  wealth  whether   this   is   cash,   debts  or  goods  and  whether this  is  less   or more.  It indicates  that  debts  or cash,  less  or more,  in
comparison  with the price of the slave  are not taken  into account  in the  Hukm,  because  they are in this case secondary  and  are not  the primary  purpose  of the contract.
Imam  Malik relates this Hadith  in Al-Muwatta'   and then  says: "The matter  is  settled unanimously in our view that if the buyer stipulates the wealth of the slave then  it belongs to him, whether  this is  cash   or debt  or goods, known  or unknown.  This  applies  even  if the  wealth owned by the slave is  more than that with which he is purchased,  and irrespective  of whether  the price is  cash debts or goods.0o)

2.   The  Hadith  of Ibn  Umar  (may Allah  be  pleased  with  him)  stating:
"When  a person  buys  a palm-grove  after pollination,  then  the fruit  is

(9)  Agreed upon by  both Al-Bukhari  and Muslim.  The text  of  this Hadith  belongs to Al• Bukhari:  Sahth Al-Bukhari",  "Kitab Al-Musaqat", chapter: When the person has a right of way  or  right to water  in an orchard or palm-grove  (No.  2250);  and Sahih  Muslim", Kitab Al-Buyu", chapter: When a person  sells palm-grove  with fruit (No.  1543).
(10)  See  4l-Muwatta".





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

for the seller,  unless the buyer stipulates this too."The Hadith conveys the permissibility of an absolute  stipulation  on the part of the buyer for the fruit  whether  or not  the fruit has begun  to ripen  despite  the prohibition of the sale of fruit before it has begun  to ripen, as is found in the  Hadith  of Jabir  (may Allah  be pleased  with him)saying:  "The Messenger  of Allah (peace  be upon  him)  forbade  the sale of fruit  be•
fore  it  has begun to ripe!As the fruit was secondary  to the prima•
ry subject-matter, which was the palm-grove,  it was overlooked  when
it would not be if it was the only subject-matter of the contract.

3.  Among  the established  principles  of Fiqh  according  to the  scholars is  that  the  secondary  is  subservient.  One  who  examines  the various issues  flowing from this  principle,  and the cases structured   upon  the principle,  will find that these principles as a group convey the meaning that the secondary  thing will take the rule of the primary  and will not be  assigned  a separate  rule;  it  will come to be owned  along with the ownership  of the primary,  and something  that  will not be overlooked separately will be overlooked when the thing is  secondary.
Among  the cases derived from the rules are the following:
a)  The  subservience   of what  has  not  begun  to  ripen  to  what  has begun to ripen even when what is ripening  is very  little.  It is stated in  "Kashshaf AI-Qina"  as follows:  "The  ripening  of some of the fruit of a tree in a garden  is  its ripening,  that  is,  of the tree as well as the ripening  of all that falls in this category in a single garden.
... It becomes valid with  what has begun to ripen as it is subsidiary
to itu
b)  The sale of a house, whose roof is painted with gold, for gold, or is painted  with silver for silver;  the sale of a sword ornamented with gold for gold;  the sale of milk for  milk; or a thing  made  of wool for wool  and so on.

(11)  Agreed  upon  by both  AI-Bukhari   and Muslim.  The text of this Hadith  belongs to Al Bukhari:  "Sahth Al-Bukhari",  "Kitab Al-Musaqat", chapter: When the person  has a right of way or right  to water  in an orchard  or palm-grove  (No.  2250);  and "Sahih Muslim", Kitab Al-Byu", chapter: When a person sells palm-grove  with fruit (No.  1543).
(12)   Agreed upon  by both Al-Bukhari and Muslim.
(13)   "Kashshaf Al-Qina" [3:  287]  see also 41-Maughn  [6:  156].



578





Sharr'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

Issuance  of Bonds
The  basis for  the  impermissibility  of issuing  interest-bearing bonds  is that  they represent,  in their  customary  nature,  a loan  and  the meaning of a loan is  applied to them  in their nature  according  to the Shari'ah.  As each loan that yields a benefit is  Riba, and the issuance  of bonds  is based upon  loans with  interest,  their  issuance  is  prohibited   according  to the Shari'ah.
Dealing  in (Negotiation of)  Bonds
The basis for the impermissibility of dealing in bonds  is  what has been settled  with  respect  to their  issuance  due to their  being based  on Riba. The reason  is  that the word  negotiation  includes  the meaning  of conti• nuity  and  the  transfer  of the  bond  from  one  hand  to  another  bearing interest  benefits.  This  means  that  the  buyer  ct a bond  continues  to  be a creditor of the issuing corporation  and demands  Riba for his debt.  This is  impermissible according  to the Shari'ah,  and all dealing leading to this is  impermissible.
































579





Sharf'ah  Standard  No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)





Appendix (C)
Definitions


Share

It is  the share of a shareholder in the assets of the corporation  and is represented  by a certificate that can be negotiated.  The term share is  also applied to the certificate that represents such share.

Preference Shares
These are shares whose bearer is  accorded priority over the holder of the ordinary share in the distribution of dividends and in claiming his share in the assets of the corporation  at the time of liquidation.
Tamattu' Shares

These are shares whose holder is  granted compensation  for his  shares that are offered for redemption during the existence of the corporation, and in exchange for this he is granted Tamattu' shares that grant him the rights that belong to the holder of shares based upon capital, except in dividends and the distribution of assets a the time of its  winding up, insofar as  the owner of the Tamattu' shares is  given a share in the profits less than that given to the shares based upon capital, just as  the owner of the Tamattu' shares does not get a share in the assets of the corporation  at the time of winding  up until   the owners of shares based on capital  are granted  the value of their shares.

Futures  Contract
It is a contract for a specified thing, or one described as def erred liability, for a deferred prince.

Option  Contract
It is a contract for compensation for an abstract right granting the own•
er the right to sell a specified thing, or to buy it for a specified price, during



580





Sharf'ah  Standar d No  (21):  Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)

a determined period, or at a fixed date, either directly or through  an organ•
isation  that guarantees  the rights of the two parties.

Swap Contract
It is  an agreement  between two parties to exchange at a subsequent  date the average return  on a specified share, or a group of share  fa- the average return  on a share or for another  financial asset.

Bond

It is  a financial paper issued  by trading  establishments  and governments in order to raise long-term  loans  (wealth)  in lieu of interest that is paid to the bearer of the bond  after periods.  They are sometimes  issued at a discount with respect to their face value.






































581


























Shari'ah Standard No. (22)



Concession Contracts












Contents


Subject                                                                                       Page



Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        588
I.  Scope of the Standard ..........sos.sos.so.so.so.ososoooooooooo.sos......      588
2.  Definition of Concession.........................................................................        588
3.  Permissibility of Concession Contracts  .............sos.a..a.a.....................      588
4  Offering the Concession  Right ...........as.so.sos.sass..ass.so.ass.as.....      588
5.  Concession  Contracts  for Utilization  of Minerals,  Water  and the
like  (Utilization Concession).................................................................        589
6.  Concession  Contracts  for  Construction  of Projects  (Construction
Concession)...............................................................................................        592

7.  Application  of Utilization Concession Contracts by Institutions......        594
8.  Application  of Construction Concession Contracts by Institutions.        595
9.  Disposing of the Concession License.....................................................        596
IO.  Management Concession  Contracts.......................................................        596
11.  Date of Issuance cf the Standard.............................................................        597
Adoption  of the Standard......................................................................        598
Appendices
Appendix  (a):   Brief History cf the Preparation of the Standard..............        599
Appendix  (b):  The Shari'ah  Basis for the Standard ..................co.....       60l
















585








IN  THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  THE ALL-MERCIFUL,  THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all  the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad,  and his household and all his  companions





Preface


The purpose of this Standard is to indicate the rules that govern Concession Contracts for utilization of minerals, water and the likes (Utilization Concession),  or construction  of projects   (Construction  Concession),  or management  cf government  facilities  and projects that provide services to the public  (Management Concession).  The Standard  also  highlights  the Shari'ah adaptation of such contracts, as well  as their underlying procedures, rights and duties.  Moreover,  it  portrays  application  of Concession  Contracts  by Islamic fi nancial Institutions  (the  Institution Institutions).

























(1) The  word  (Institution/Institutions)  is used here to refer,  in short,  to  Islamic  financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



587





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (22):  Concession  Contracts





Statement of the Standard


1.  Scope of the Standard

This  Standard  covers the  basic Shari'ah  rulings  relating  to Concession Contracts  for utilization,  construction or management   of projects,  and provides guidance to Institutions  on application of such contracts.  It does not  cover legal  or  consensual  concession  rights,  which  are subsidiary rights.  This  standard  does not cover franchises  as it should  be dealt with by a separate  standard.

2. Definition of Concession

Concession in this context refers to the act of an authorized party granting another  party  the right of utilizing,  constructing or managing  a project for agreed upon consideration.

3. Permissibility of Concession Contracts

3/1  The concession contracts  described  in this Standard  are permissible, as set out in the  Shari'ah  rulings,  unless  those  contracts comprise an element that does not conform to the rules and principles of Islamic Shari'ah.  Such  contracts  are considered  to be among the devices that facilitate realization of public interest or the interests pursued  by the two contracting  parties.

3/2  There  is  no Shari'ah objection  to taking on the procedures  required to the offering of concession  rights against specific fes  or any compensation  stipulated  in the contract,  unless the deal constitutes an  element  of  Riha  (usury),  Gbarar   (uncertainty),  or  any  other Shari'ah-banned  practices.
4. Offering the Concession Right

When  offering  concession  rights, due consideration   should  be given  to
justice,  equality of chances,  and realization  of public interest.



588





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (22):  Concession  Contracts

5. Concession Contracts for  Utilization of Minerals,  Water  and  the Like
(Utilization  Concession):

5/1  Definition  of  utilization concession contracts

A Utilization  Concession  contract  is an agreement  between the State and a natural or legal  person (Institution)  according to which the latter becomes the sole owner of the right of extracting  and producing  the minerals,  water  or any other  object  in  question  against  a  specific
remuneration,  as  is shown  in item  5/3 below.

5/2  Formal  procedures of utilization concession

5/2/1  Granting  a survey  license

The  State  has the right  to require  natural  or  legal  persons  to obtain permission  (license) before conducting survey in a certain area  against payment of a specific amount of fee or rent to the State. Such  a license does not grant its holder the right of the sole surveyor in that area nor does it grant him the right to conduct works relating to extraction through  mining and construction  of the required facilities.

5/2/2  Granting  exploration  licenses

The  State has the  right  to require  natural  or legal persons  to obtain  permission   (license) before conducting exploration  in a certain  area for a certain  period against payment  of a specific amount  of fee  or  rent  to  the  State.  Such  exploration   license may entitle its  holder  the right to become  the sole explorer  in that  area  and  the right of conducting  the  works  required  for exploration.

5/2/3  Obtaining  utilization  concession

The exploration  licensee,  after discovering  the minerals, water or any object in question, becomes eligible for the exclusive right of obtaining  the utilization  concession  in the area specified in the license,  unless  the license stipulates otherwise.



589





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (22):  Concession  Contracts

5/2/4 If until  the  end  of the exploration  period,  the  holder  of the exploration   license   (the   licensee)   does   not   discover   the minerals,  water or for whatever the license has been obtained then the licensee is  not entitled to utilization concession  at the end of that period.

5/2/5 Notwithstanding the procedural order stated in preceding para• graphs, the State  may offer  exploration  or utilization  conces• sions directly, and without  resorting  to the above-mentioned procedures.

5/2/6 When the State requests a specialized body to conduct survey or exploration  on its  behalf, the contractual  relationship becomes subject to the rulings of"Ijarah" and "Ju'alah"In this case Shari'ah
Standard No. (9)  on ljarah  and ljarah  Muntahia Bittamleek,  as well  as Shari'ah Standard  No.  (15) on Ju'alah,  should be referred to.

5/3 Shari'ah  perspective on utilization  concession  contracts

Utilization of minerals, water resources and the likes cannot take place without  exploration,  which  entails an  unknown   amount  of effort. Whereas  the  remuneration  to  which  the  holder  of concession  is entitled,  is  usually a well-defi ned lump  sum amount  or percentage share of the output.  The Shari'ah  classifies such  contracts  as  a form
of Ju'alah,  where the State  is  the "Ja'il" (Jalah  initiator), the licensee
Institution  is  the "Amil  (hired  party)  and the  specific  amount  to be received   by the  latter  is  the  "Jl"  (compensation  amount).   [see Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (15)  on Ju'alah]

5/4  Scope of utilization concession  contracts

Since  utilization  concession  contracts  are  concluded  between  the State on the one hand and natural or legal persons on the other, the following should be observed:

5/4/1  When  adopting  the  Fiqh  viewpoint  that  considers  minerals to  be  the  property   ct the  State,  whether  such  mineral  have been extracted from a State-owned  or a privately-owned land,



590





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (22):  Concession  Contracts

concession  contracts   may  be  applied  to all types  of lands, whether  State-  or privately-owned.

5/4/2 When   adopting   the  Fiqh  viewpoint   that  gives the  right  of utilization  of minerals  to the owner of the land or its usufruct against a fee payable to the State, the following types of lands should not become subject to concession  contracts:

5/4/2/1  Privately -owned  lands whether  vacant or built on.

5/4/2/2 Wastelands that have been contracted  for development according to the relevant Shari'ah stipulations and legal rulings.

5/4/2/3 Lands allotted by the State to natural  or legal persons, whether  through  change of ownership  title or fa tem• porary  utilization.

5/5  Requirements  of obtaining the utilization concession

A holder  of a utilization  concession  is  entitled  to undertake  all the activities required  for utilization, such as establishing refineries and treatment  laboratories, acquiring transportation  devices and facilities, etc.  The holder becomes the sole owner of such rights throughout  the period of the concession license thereof
5/6  Continuity of utilization

Concession contracts usually indicate the commitment  of the licensee to continue  utilization  as per contract  or the prevailing  customary practices.  In case the licensee ceases utilization without  a reasonable excuse, the licensee may be given a reasonable grace period to restart again  and  preserve  utilization,  otherwise  the  State  has the  right  to cancel the license thereof.

5/7  Product pricing  and  purchase by the State

5/7/ 1  The  State  has the  right  to  determine  in advance  the way in which the licensee should dispose of his share of the extracted products  and the value to be paid to him taking  into account public  interest



591





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (22):  Concession  Contracts

5/7/2  In addition  to its  own share in the product,  the State  has also the preemptory right of purchasing the quantities it needs from the output, according to the prevailing prices and contractual terms.

5/8 Expiry  of utilization concession  contracts

A utilization  concession  contract  expires at the end of its  specified period, or when the two parties  agree to prematurely cancel  it.  The contract can also be cancelled when there remains no more output to be utilized. Moreover, each of the two parties has the right to revoke the contract when the other party breaches a contractual condition or commitment.  In this case the breaching party has to compensate the other party fer any consequent actual  damages.

6. Concession  Contracts for Construction of Projects  (Construction  Con•
cession)

6/1   Defi nition  and forms  of a construction concession  contract

6/1/1  Definition  of a construction  concession  contract

A Construction  concession contract  is a contract  between the State and another party according to which the latter constructs a specifically defined project usually related to public utilities.

6/1/2  Forms of construction  concession contracts:

Construction  concession contracts may take several forms including the following:
6/1/2/1  When  the licensee  constructs the project according to certain  specifications, on a piece of land owned by the State, and the  State  becomes the owner of the project, while the licensee is entitled to the usufruct of the project for a specific period. After this period,  the ownership  of the usufruct is transferred  to the State.

6/1/2/2 When  the  licensee  constructs   the  project  according to certain  specifications  on a piece  of land  owned  by the  State,   and  the  project  and its  usufructs  become



592





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (22):  Concession  Contracts

the property  of the licensee for  a specific period  after which  the  ownership  of the project  (and  its  usufruct) goes to the State.

6/1/2/3 When  the licensee constructs  the project according to certain  specifications  on  a piece  of land owned by the State,  and the project becomes a property  of the State, while the  two parties  agree to  share  the  revenue  for a specific period  after which the project belongs to the licensee.
6/1/3  In all three cases set out in 6/1/2,  the licensee becomes entitled
to collection of  fees or rent for provision of services to the public.

6/2  Shari'ah perspective  on construction concession  contracts: Construction  concession  contracts vary with regard to their Shari'ah
adaptation,  according to the following conditions:

6/2/1  Ifthe commitment  of the licensee  includes construction  works as well  as provision  of materials,  which  is  the  predominant case,  the contract  is  that of"Istisnaa.  The value  of the contract is  the right which enables the licensee to utilize the project for one's own benefit for  a specific period  before handing  it  over to the State.

6/2/2  If the project is constructed on a piece of land  that the licensee obtained  on  lease  from  the  State  against  handing   over  the project  thereto  after a specific  period,  the  contract  is  that  of "Ijarah"  and the rent is  the project itself which will be handed over to the State  at the end of the contractual  period.

6/3  Remuneration  for construction  concession  contracts

6/3/1 When  the  remuneration  for  construction  of the  project  is determined  in  terms  ct the  right  to  utilize  the  project  for a specific period, the contract is  considered as Istisna'a" against a price determinable in terms ct utilizing the constructed facility for  a specific period before  handing it over to "al-Mustasni"?



593





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (22):  Concession  Contracts

6/3/2 If the remuneration for the construction of a project is  deter• mined  in terms  of a certain  amount   of money, the  licensee retains the ownership of the project  to ascertain  one's right to get the price  through   utilization  of the  project.  Licensee  has also the right  of arranging a clearance  deal with  the licensor so that  the  licensee  can receive  the  full price  and  hand  over the project  to the licensor  before the end of the contract peri• od.  Otherwise, the licensee keeps on utilizing  the project  until the receipt  of the full amount  agreed  upon.

7.  Application of Utilization Concession Contracts by Institutions

Institutions  can  apply.  utilization   concession   contracts  either  through direct relationship with  the  State,  or  by playing  an  intermediary role in the contract between  the State and  the licensee. Application of such contracts may take place in one of the following forms:
7/1  Ju'alah

It is  possible to apply Ju'alah  or Parallel  Ju'alah  where the licensee re•
ceives a specific share of the output  as remuneration.

7/2  ljarah

ljarah  contract  may  be  applied  where  the  State  gives the  land  on lease to the licensee  for a rent  payable  as a predetermined share  of the output.  The licensee may, in turn,  give the land  on lease  to a third party to establish the project thereon  (sub-contracting).

7/3  Mudarabah

Mudarabah may be applied  where the State provides  the land to the licensee  to utilize  it on the  basis of a predetermined rate of profit sharing.  The  Institutions  may either  implement  the project  directly or through  two-steps  Mudarabah.
7/4  Musharakah

In utilization concession  contracts, Musharakah - whether fixed or diminishing - may be applied  as follows:

7/4/1  In fixed Musharakah, the Institution contributes a share  in the required  capital besides the State or the party that executes the



594





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (22):  Concession  Contracts

concession  license,  and the  Musharakah  continues up to the end of the contract's period.

7/4/2  In diminishing Musharakah, the Institution  contributes a share in the  required  capital,  and  undertakes   (the Institution or the party that executes the concession license)  to sell its share in the project gradually to the State.

8. Application  of Construction Concession Contracts by Institutions

Institutions  may apply construction concession contracts whether  through direct relationship  with the State,  or by entering  as an intermediary party in the contract  between  the State  and the licensee.  Application  of such contracts  may take place  in one ct the following forms:
8/1  Ijarah  and Ijarah  Muntahia Bittamleek

In this case,  the licensee  hires the land  from  the  State  with the  aim of constructing the project  thereon  and presenting the project  back to the State based on Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek.  'The licensee may;, use a sub-contract of operating or diminishing Ijarah, to rent out the land to another  party  to construct the project  thereon.
8/2  Istisna'a

Istisna'a  and Parallel  Istisna'a  contracts  may  be  applied  where  the State  is  "al-Mustasni"  and  the  Institution   becomes  "al-Sant  (the licensee  is  a parallel  Mustasni')" and the price  of the product is  the income  generated  from the fe or rent collected  from the public  for provision  of the services.

8/3 Musharakah

In construction  concession  contracts Musharakah, whether  fixed or diminishing,  may be applied  as follows:
8/3/1  In fixed Musharakah, the Institution contributes a share in the required  capital besides the State or the party that executes the concession  license,  and the Musharakah  continues   up to the
end of the contract's  period.



595





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (22):  Concession  Contracts

8/3/2  In diminishing Musharakah,  the Institution  contributes a share in the required  capital,  and undertakes  (the Institution  or the party  that  executes the concession  license)  to sell its  share in the project gradually to the State.

9.  Disposing of the Concession  License

Since  the concession  license is a financial  right,  its  owner  may dispose it of through  selling, leasing, mortgaging,  partnership or securitization according to Shari'ah rulings,  as well as the conditions  imposed  by the licensor.

10.  Management Concession  Contracts

10/1  Definition of management concession  contracts

These are contracts  between the State  and other parties according to which  the right of managing public utilities  and providing services to the public is  given against a specific price.

10/2  Shari'ah  perspective on management concession  contracts

10/2/IWhen the price for offering management  concession  is  de• termined as a lump  sum amount of money or a percentage of total  income,  the contract  between the State  and the licensee is that  of ljarah.  The  licensor  in this  case has the right  to receive  rent for offering the concession  license, in addition to the amount/percentage  of income the licensor deserves during the period of the contract. If the price of the manage• ment concession is a percentage of the profit (net income   af• ter expenses and allocations), the contract between the State
and the licensee becomes Mudarabah  wherein  the capital  is
the original  facility or the project itself.

10/2/2In both cases mentioned  in item  (10/2/1) above, the contract between the State and  the project's utilizer is  either that  of ljarah or Bay' (sale)  contract,  as per the nature of the activity
in question.



596





Shari'ah  Standard  No. (22):  Concession  Contracts

10/3  Cancellation of the management  concession contract

Management concession  contract is  a fixed-term contract. It may be rescinded  by the State  when the licensee breaches  a condition or  fails to  meet  one's  contractual  obligations,  The  licensee  may also rescind  the contract  on condition that  the  licensee takes the measures  that ascertain  the provision  of the services to the public.

10/4Pricing of services

It is  permissible  for the  licensor  to  fix or  adjust  the price  of the services to be delivered by the licensee in a way that leads to establi• shing justice and preservation  of the interests  of both  the licensee and the beneficiaries.

10/5  Observation  of the contract's conditions

The licensor  has the right to perform  (directly or through  depu• tation) monitoring and inspection  to ascertain observation cl the conditions and specifications  stipulated  in the contract.  It has also the right to impose  penalties  stipulated  in the contract, in case of breach of contractual obligations  on the part of the licensee.

11. Date  of  Issuance  of  the Standard

This  Standard was issued  on 22  Rab~'  I,  1426  A.H.,  corresponding to 2
May 2005 A.D.























597





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (22):  Concession  Contracts





Adoption of the Standard


The Sharl'ah  Board has adopted  the Standard on Concession  Contracts  in its meeting No. (14) held in Dubai on 21-22 Rabi' I,  1426 A.H., corresponding to 30 April -2  May 2005 A.D.












































598





Shari'ah  Standard  No  (22):  Concession  Contracts





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


The Sharf'ah Board decided in its meeting No. (7) held on 9-13 Ramadan
1422  A.H.,  corresponding  to 24-28  November  2001  A.D.,  in Makkah Al
-Mukarramah to issue a Shari'ah  Standard on Concession  Contracts.

On  12  Jumada  I  1423  A.H.,  corresponding to  22 July  2002 A.D.,  the Shari'ah  Standards Committee  decided to commission  a Shari'ah consultant to prepare  a draft standard  on concession  contracts.

In  its  meeting   No.   (5)   the  Shari'ah   Standards   Committee  (2)   held on  I  Rajab  1423  A.H.,  corresponding to  8 September  2002 A.D.,  in the Kingdom   of Bahrain,  the  committee   discussed   the  Shari'ah  study  and advised  the  consultant to introduce the  necessary  amendments,  in light of the discussions  and observations of its members.

In the joint  meeting  of  the Shari'ah  Standards  Committees  (1)  and  (2) on 21  January 2004 A.D., held for discussing  the observations  made in the public hearing  that had been convened  on the same day in the Kingdom of Bahrain,  the  committee   discussed  the  draft  standard   on  concession contracts  and introduced necessary changes. The committee also requested the  consultant   to  review  the  document   in  light  cf  the  discussion   and comments  cf its  members.

The committee  once again discussed the draft standard in its meeting in Dubai on 28 Rabi' I,   1425 A.H.,  corresponding to  16 June 2004 A.D.,  and made further  changes therein.

The  revised  draft  of  the  standard  was then  submitted  to  the  Shari'ah
Board  in its  meeting  No.  (3)  held  in Makkah Al-Mukarramah  on  26-30
Sha'ban  1425  A.H.,,  corresponding to 10-14  October  2004 A.D.  The Board



599
