




Sharf'ah Standard No. (22): Concession  Contracts

made some changes on the document and decided to present it to some experts for their comments before discussing it later in the public hearing.

A public hearing was held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 15 Safar 1426
A.H., corresponding to 25 March 2005 A.D. and attended by more than
35 participants representing central banks, Institutions, accounting firms, Shari'ah scholars academics and other concerned parties. Several comments were made before and after the public hearing.  Some members of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) responded to the queries raised during the session.

In the meeting ofthe Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2), held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 15-16 Safar 1426 A.H., corresponding  to
25-26 March 2005 A.D., the comments made during the public hearing were discussed and some appropriate changes were made.

The Shari'ah Board convened its meeting No. (14) on 21-23 Rabi' I, 1426
A.H., corresponding to 30 April -2 May 2005 A.D., in Dubai (U. A. E) and adopted the Standard






























600





Sharf'ah Standard No. (22): Concession Contracts





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Concession for Utiliza tion of Minerals
■  The right of the State to regulate survey or exploration ofminerals, water and the like by offering exclusive rights of utilization,  stems from the fact that such an act by the State leads to realization of public interest and prevention of disputes. This reasoning is adopted by the fuqhaa who argue that development ofwasteland requires State permission. The basic assumption here,  knowingly,  is that when the State  disposes of public property, its act is supposed to be that of serving the cause of public interest, which should always surpass private interest.
■  The distinction between survey on the one hand,  and exploration and
concession on the other, and the fact that only the latter two can enable the licensee to have the exclusive status as a contractor, stems from the fact that survey is based on mere expectation, while exploration is like Tahjir (retention)  in wasteland development, which  usually precedes utilization. Thus, offering the exclusive right to the explorer can be based on the saying of the Prophet (peace be upon him):  "Whom who develops a piece ofwasteland shall become its owner.
• The ruling that gives the one who discovers the minerals the priority in utilizing them is extracted from the fact that exploration resembles wasteland development, which entitles to ownership of the developed land.
■  The alternate viewpoint of the Maliki School, which considers minerals as the property of Bayt al-Mal (treasury) even when discovered in a pri• vate land, leans towards the fact that no body, the landlord included, can claim the honor of bringing these minerals into being. Putting the mi-

(2) This   Hadith   has   been   Related  by  AI-Bukhari   in  his   "Sahih"  [3:   139],   Al-Shaab
Publications,  1378 A.H.



601





Sharf'ah Standard No. (22): Concession  Contracts

nerals  at the  disposal  of the  State,  therefore,  does  not  leave any room for dispute between  the property owner  and the one who discovers the minerals.
■  The viewpoint ofthe majority of the Fuqaha, including the Maliki School,
that the minerals are the property of the landowner, focuses on their pers• pective that deems land ownership  as underground resources. Moreover, the fact that  the Kharaj imposed  on land  is one fifth  indicates  that  the remaining  four fifths are the property of the landowner.
■  Eligibility of the holder  of the concession  for utilization  of minerals  to other  rights  pertaining to production and transportation devices is due to the fact that  such rights constitute  the complementary requirements. This reasoning also holds true for eligibility of the licensee to the easement rights pertinent to one's license.
■  The  condition  that  the licensee  should  sustain the  activity in question originates  from the Shari'ah  ruling  on the case of a person  who retains a piece of wasteland for a period  of time without developing  it.  In this connection it has  been  narrated that  Caliphate  Umar  Ibn  Al-Khattab said:  "When  somebody  develops a piece of wasteland  that had been left for three years undeveloped by its original owner, the land becomes the property  of the developer3
■  Eligibility of the State to purchase the quantity it requires from the output of the project  is justifiable by the need to realize public interest without harming the  licensee,  since  purchasing takes  place  according to  the procedures  and conditions  available to other  clients. With  regard to the right of the State to fix the price of the product,  the justification  is hinged on  the  need  to  prevent  social  injury  that  could  result  from  charging unduly high prices by licensee.
■  The State is given the right of amending  concession  contracts  for mine• rals when necessary, because the acts of the State are normally considered to be in pursuance  ofpublic interest, which should always surpass private interest.

(3) Related by Abu Yusuf in "AL-Kharaj" (P. 61), Dar AI-Maarif edition. AI-Hafiz said in
"AL-Dirayah" that this Hadith has been narrated by reliable people.



602





Sharf'ah Standard No. (22): Concession  Contracts

Concession for Construction  of Projects
■  Project construction  contracts are permissible because they come under commitments  that should be honored by virtue of the divine ordain of Allah,  Exalted be He,  Who says:  {"fulfill  (all) obligations}and also the Hadith of the Prophet (peace be upon him):  "Muslims honor all their obligations except those which permitprohibited deeds orprohibitpermitted deeds5
■  Permissibility of remunerating  the licensee by allowing him to benefit from the project before handing it over to the licensor, relates to the fact that in Istisna'a, temporary  benefiting from the product  may constitute the price of its production. That is to say, the price can be either money or usufruct including that ofthe product in question. This viewpoint has been confirmed by a similar resolution of the Al Barak.a Seminar.<6J  The other viewpoint referred to in this Standard is that the price should be fixed first, and then the licensee is given the chance to utilize the project until he gets the remuneration  agreed upon, regardless of any specific period of time. The basis for this viewpoint is that a predetermined period may not be sufficient for getting the full price. This viewpoint, therefore, seems to visualize the relationship between the State and the Institution as a management  relationship, as well as a clearance arrangement  with regard to the price to be paid and the period of utilization.
■  Permissibility for Institutions  to enter into concession  contracts  with
the State directly or as intermediaries is clear because they do this in a permissible contractual form such as Ju'alah, Mudarabah, Musharakah, Istisna'a and Ijarah. All these contractual forms are permissible whether performed  directly or though  entering as an intermediary between the State and the other original party to the contract.

(4) [Al-Ma ' idah  (The Table):  1]
(5) Narrated  by several companions  of the Prophet  (peace be upon  him) and  quoted  by: Ahmad  [1: 312], Ibn Majah  [2:  784], Mustafa AI-Babi Al-Hala bi, Cairo, 1372 A.H./1952
A.D.); AI-Hakim (Hyderabad Publications, India, 1355 A.H.); Al-Bayhaqi [6: 70 and 156], [10:  133], Hayderabad Publications, India, 1355 A.H.); A-Daraqatni  [4: 228], [3: 77], Dar AI-Mahasin, Cairo, 1372 A.H./  1952 A.D.).
(6) Resolutions  and Recommendations of the  17  Seminar of Al Baraka,  Resolution  No.
13/2, (P. 220).



603





Sharf'ah Standard No. (22): Concession  Contracts

Management Contracts
■    Permissibility for the State to offer concession licenses for management ofpublic utilities is justified by the fact that the State has the right ofregu• lating such facilities and collecting fees, and therefore it can transfer this right to a second party. The management  contract in this case is Ijarah and the government has the right of identifying the lessee on the ground of common interest.
■      Permissibility of fixing the contract's value in terms of money is that the deal is considered as ljarah, and determination ofthe contract's value as a specific share ofthe project's income could embody uncertainty (Jahalah) pertaining to the possibility of realizing the agreed upon amount during the contract's period. The relationship between the State and the licensee, in this sense, is considered as an Ijarah deal. If such relationship is consi• dered as Mudarabah, the basis for determination of the contract's value will become a given share ofthe project's profit, which can be determined only after preservation ofthe project's capital, which is the managed asset in this case. The Hanbalis permit Mudarabah on income-generating as• sets like animals. The reason behind the justification for sharing the net profit after allocations is the preservation  ofthe project's capital.
•  Permissibility for licensor to rescind the contract when the other party breaches a condition or fails to fulfill an obligation is derived from the commitment of Muslims to honor contractual obligations according to the Hadith of the Prophet (peace be upon him) stating:  "Muslims shall honor their obligations"











(7) Narrated  by several companions  of the Prophet  (peace be upon him) and quoted by: Ahmad [1:312], Ibn Majah [2: 784], Mustafa Al-Babi AI-Halabi, Cairo, 1372 A.H./1952
A.D.); AI-Hakim (Hyderabad  Publications, India, 1355 A.H.); Al-Daraqatni [4: 228]
and [3: 77], Dar Al-Mahasin, Cairo, 1372 A.H./ 1952 A.D.).



604





















Shari'ah Standard No. (23)



Agency and the Act of an
Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                             609
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................        610

1. Scope of the Standard..............................................................................       610
2. Agency.......................................................................................................         610
3. Conditions on the Agency Parties                                                            612
4. Types of Agency........................................................................................        613
5. Commitments  of the Principal and the Agent.....................................       616
6. Stipulations on the Agent                                                                617
7. Expiry of Agency......................................................................................       619
8. Act of an Uncommissioned  Agent (Fodooli)........................................       620
9. Date oflssuance of the Standard.............................................................   620
Adoption ofthe Standard......................................................................        621
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        622
Appendix (b):  The Sharf'ah Basis for the Standard.....................................       624





















607








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


The purpose of this Standard is to clarify the Shari'ah rulings that govern the activities of Islamic financial Institutions  (Institution/Institutions)in appointingagents orbecoming agents ofothers, whether in arranging contracts and disposing of property,  or undertaking procedural tasks, or managing/ investing funds. The Standard also indicates the underlying conditions of Agency, elaborates on its various forms, spells out its repercussions, and outlines the responsibilities of both the Principal and the Agent. Moreover-, the Standard aims to embark upon the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent "Fodooli" and the Shari'ah rulings thereon.























(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



609





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers agency and the acts of an uncommissioned agent in concluding  contracts  on financial transactions (such as sale, Ijarah  and compensatory reconciliation),   disposing  of assets, providing  services and  conducting  practical  acts  such  as receipt,  payment  and  delivery. The  Standard  also covers areas such  as fund  management,  real estate and investment  agency. However, it does not cover agency and the act of an uncommissioned agent in several other affairs oflife such as worshipping (like Zak.ah, for which  there  is a separate  standard), personal  affairs, penalty  affairs,  legal prosecution/advocacy,  and  documentary  credits (which have also been dealt with in a separate standard).

2. Agency

2/1  Definition,  permissibility and characteristics of agency

2/1/1   Agency is the act of one party  delegating the other  to act on its behalf in what can be a subject matter of delegation and it is, thus, permissible.

2/1/2 Agency is, basically, a non-binding  contract for both the parties thereto. However, it may sometimes become a binding contract. [see 3/4 below]

2/2  Basic elements of agency

2/2/1   The basic elements of agency include the form,  the subject matter of agency, and the two parties to the contract (the principal and the agent).

2/2/2 The form  of agency comprises  any act that  customary  prac• tices traditionally consider  a delegation  of the right to acting by someone on behalf the other. Such delegation comprises of



610





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

offer and acceptance which has no standard form of wording and may be expressed through  utterance  of words, writing, messaging or gesture. In accepting non-paid agency, silence is also considered as sufficient acceptance, while a negative re• sponse is indicative of rejection of agency.

2/2/3 Agency may take place in any ofthe following forms:

2/2/3/1 Immediate  Agency,  as usually  the  case,  where  the contract becomes effective as soon as it is entered into.

2/2/3/2 Conditional Agency: where the validity of the contract is made subject to fulfillment of a certain condition, for instance when a debtor agrees to put his own assets under the management ofhis creditor in case ofdefault

2/2/3/3 Future Agency: where the contract becomes valid only at a specific date in the future.

2/2/3/4 Agency, whether  free or limited,  shall be subject to specific conditions. In case offree agency, consideration should be given to customary practices,  interest and the state ofthe principal.

2/2/4 While  conditionality and limitation  may be resorted  to in concluding agency contracts, they may also be confined to the disposal of the subject matter of agency. In this case, though the agency contract is immediately effective, disposal is made subject to the fulfillment of a specific condition, such as re• sorting back to the principal before disposal. The conditions set by the principal should be observed such as offering him a guarantee or lien.

2/2/5 The subject matter ofagency is for what the contract is entered into.  [see item 3/3]

2/2/6 The two parties to the contract are the principal and the agent
[see items 3/1 and 3/2]



611





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

3. Conditions on the Agency Parties

3/1  Conditions on the principal

3/1/1 The principal should possess legal capacity to enter into con•
tract.

3/1/2 The principal should have the right to dispose of the asset in question. Agency, therefore, is not acceptable from a legally incapable person like a lunatic or an indiscriminating  minor. A partially capable person, such as a discriminating  minor, may appoint an agent for matters that result in absolute benefit to him, such as accepting donations from others, but he cannot appoint an gent in harmful matters like making donations. In acts that may be harmful or useful, such as buying and selling, a partially capable person may appoint an agent, but the acts of that agent remain pending the approval of the principal's guardian or whosoever enjoys the similar right on behalf of the principal.

3/2 Conditions on the agent

3/2/1 The agent should have full legal capacity, because a lunatic or an indiscriminating minor  cannot become an agent. A dis• criminating  minor  may become an agent, provided  that all the contractual  commitments  are the sole responsibility  of principal.

3/2/2 The agent should be aware of his status as an agent. When somebody acted on behalf of another and later on, the former comes to know that he is an agent of the latter, the preceding act does not fall under  the agency contract. If, however, he does so with the intention of performing the act regardless of agency, the case should be subjected to the rules governing the act of an uncommissioned agent (Fodooli). [see item 8]

3/3 Conditions on the subject matter of agency

3/3/1 The subject matter of agency should be known to the agent.
However, minor Jahalah (unknowability) that does not lead to



612





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

dispute, or temporary uncertainty, may be dispensed  with.  It can also be overlooked when, in absolute agency, the principal authorizes the agent to channel the funds in any form of investment Nevertheless, the agent should observe the interest of the principal, as well as the norms  and customary practices if necessary.

3/3/2 It should  be  owned  by the  principal, or he has  the  right  of deposing thereof.

3/3/3  It should be something that can be disposed ofthrough agency.
This includes all types of financial contracts  and dealings that a person  can perform personally.  Any contract  that  a person is permitted by Sharf'ah to be involved  in personally  can be performed through  agency.

It should not involve a Sharf'ah-banned practice, like trading in impermissible  commodities  or committing usurious lending.
4. Types of Agency

4/1  Agency may take the following forms:

4/1/1 Specific versus  general  agency.  General  agency  includes  all methods  of disposing  of assets provided  that  the  interest of the principal  and the customary  practices  are well observed. Disposal  of assets here  does  not  include  making  donations, unless the principal  authorizes the agent to do so.

4/1/2 Limited  versus  absolute  agency.  Absolute  agency  is bound by customary  practices  and the interest  of the principal.  It is not permissible in absolute agency to sell at less or buy at more than  the market price,  nor is it permissible to perform  barter and deferred payment  sales, except with the prior  consent  of principal.

4/1/3  Paid versus non-paid agency.  [see item 4/2]

4/1/4 Binding versus non-binding agency.  [see item 4/3]

4/1/5 Temporary versus continuous  agency.  [see item 4/4]



613





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

4/2 Paid agency

4/2/ 1  Paid agency is permissible in Shari'ah, whether remuneration is explicitly stipulated in the contract or ascertained in accordance with the customary  practices, as when the agent doses provide such service except for remuneration.

4/2/2 When agency is paid, it falls under the Shari'ah rulings on Ijarah. [see item 4/3]

4/2/3 The  amount  payable  as remuneration for agency  should  be known, whether in lump sum or as a share of a specific amount of income. It may  also be defined  in terms  of an amount  of income  to be known  in the future, as when  remuneration is linked  to an indicator  that  may be quoted  at the beginnings of different  intervals  of time.  However,  it is not  permissible to leave remuneration for agency undetermined and allow the agent to take an unspecified share from the entitlements  of the principal.

4/2/4 When  remuneration  for agency  is not specified, it may  be measured in terms  of the prevailing  market rate  for similar effort.

4/2/5  Remuneration for agency may be any gain in excess of a specific amount of output of the operation, or a share of the output.

4/2/6 A certain  share of the output  may be added to the specific re•
muneration of the agent, as a motivation.

4/2/7 When  the agent, for no reasonable excuse, refrains from  car• rying on agency that he has been paid for, and the work he has done was beneficial, he becomes entitled to the remuneration commensurate with the part ofwork done, and within the limits of the contract value for that part of work. The agent in this case is bound to indemnify the principal for any actual loss resulting from his refusal to continue the work.

When the principal, for no reasonable excuse, forces the agent to discontinue  the work before the end of the agency period,



614





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

the  agent  becomes  entitled  to  the  full remuneration agreed upon.

When the principal, for a valid reason, forces the agent to dis• continue  the work before the  end  of the  contract,  the  agent becomes entitled to remuneration for that part of work he has already performed.

4/2/8 Damage  of the subject matter  of agency does not relieve the principal from paying remuneration to the agent for the part of the work the latter has already performed. When the damage occurs because of misconduct  or negligence of the agent, he is bound  to indemnify  the principal  for it.

4/3 Binding agency

Agency is, basically, not binding, because each of the two parties has the right to revoke the contract without denying its effects that may continue  after revocation. However, agency becomes binding  in the following cases:

4/3/1  When  it involves rights of others, as when the mortgagor  ap• points  the mortgagee  as an agent, or when  the mortgagor  is authorized  to seize the mortgaged  asset or sell it on maturity. Agency in the latter case is binding to the mortgagor  (the debt• or).  A further  example of binding  agency is a case when  the owner of an income-generating asset assigns the collection of his entitlements to an agent manager.

4/3/2 When  agency is a paid agency.  [see item 4/2]

4/3/3 When the agent commences tasks that cannot be discontinued or phased  out without  causing injury  to him  or to the princi• pal. Agency in this case remains binding  until it is possible to suspend  the work,  or phase  it out without  causing injury  to any of the two parties.

4/3/4 When  the principal  or the agent undertakes  not to revoke the contract within  a certain period.



615





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

4/4 Temporary agency

4/4/1  Basically, agency has no time limit beyond  which the contract becomes  no longer valid, because the agent can be terminated at any time. The two parties, however, may agree on a certain period after which the agency becomes invalid without a request from any of them to revoke the contract

4/4/2 The  effect of specification of a time  limit  for agency  is con• fined to restrain the agent from commencing new operations subsequently.

4/4/3 Unless the contract stipulates otherwise, the agent may com• mence new operations during the contract period even if the effects of such operations will succeed  the period of the con• tract.

5. Commitments of the Principal and the Agent

5/1  Commitments of the principal

5/1/1  In contract of procurement agency, the price and other expenses should be borne by the principal Besides the price ofpurchased commodity, the principal should reimburse the agent expenses such as those of transportation, storage, taxation, maintenance and  insurance. In paid  agency, such  expenses  should  not  be stated in the  contract as payable  by the  agent  now or in the future.

5/1/2 In paid agency, the principal should  pay the agent the amount of remuneration agreed upon  in the contract.  [ see item 4/2]
5/2 Commitments of the agent

The agent is considered as a trustee in holding the asset in question, and  therefore, he is not  bound to indemnify the principal for that asset in case of damage. He shall be held responsible for indemnity only when the damage results from his own misconduct, negligence or breach of terms  or stipulations of the contract. Breach of contract for this purpose does not include  acts that  serve the interest of the



616





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

principal, like selling at a higher or buying at a lower price. In this regard, Shari'ah Standard No.  (5) on Guarantees  indicates  under item 2/2/2 the following:

"It is not permissible  to combine agency and personal  guarantees in one contract  at the same time (i.e. the same party acting in the capacity of an agent on one hand and acting as a guarantor  on the other hand), because such a combination  conflicts with the nature of these contracts. In addition, a guarantee given by a party acting as an agent in respect of an investment turns the transaction  into an interest-based loan, since the capital ofthe investment is guaranteed in addition  to the proceeds  of the investment, (i.e. as though  the investment  agent had taken a loan and repaid it with an additional sum which is tantamount to Riba). But ifa guarantee is not stipulated in the agency contract and the agent voluntarily provides a guarantee to his principals  independently of the agency contract, the agent becomes a guarantor  in a different  capacity from that of agent.  In this case, such an agent will remain liable as guarantor even if he is discharged from acting as agent.

6. Stipulations on the Agent

6/1  Performing deals with one's self and relatives

6/1/1  When an agent conducts deals with his ascendant or descendant relatives, who are neither under his guardianship, nor are the agent's spouse, the deal is permissible unless it encompasses injustice or favoritism. In case of deals that involve relatives who are under the guardianship of the agent, or deals that involve the agent's spouse, the agent should obtain the consent of the principal.

6/1/2 An agent should not conduct deals with his own self or with his son/daughter who is still under his guardianship, or with his partner (Sharik) in the same contract.

6/1/3 The agent should not act for both parties to the contract.

6/1/4 An agent may purchase what he has bought for the principal, by way of offer and acceptance. The deal should be concluded



617





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

in such a way that  the guarantees  stemming  from the agency contract and the sale contract  are kept separate. After the completion ofthe conclusion ofthe sale contract, the commodity becomes  under   the  guarantee  of the  purchaser/agent.    [see Shari'ah Standard No. (8) on Murabahah  - item 3/1/5)

6/2 Monitoring of the provisions and rights of the contract

Monitoring the provisions of contract is the responsibility of principal, whereas monitoring  the  activities stipulated  in  the  contract  (except donations that should be assigned to the principal) is the responsibility of agent. Nevertheless,  the  principal,  by virtue  of ownership,  may pursue the agent's activities.
6/3 Breach of contract stipulations

6/3/1 When  the agent breaches the contract  in a way that does not serve the interest of the principal, the latter is free to maintain the contract or declare it invalid. Breach of the contract on the part of the agent may relate to the subject matter  of agency or part thereof, the price, on spot or deferred payment, possession (purchase),  or transfer  of ownership  (sale). [see items (8) and
5/2]

6/3/2 When the agent breaches the contract by purchasing  at a price that exceeds both the market price and the price set forth by the principal, he should compensate the principal for the difference between the purchase price and the market price.  Similarly,  if the breach  is by selling at less than  the price specified by the principal,  compensation  should be for the difference between the selling price and the market  price. Hence, the case here is similar to what happens  in Mudarabah  or investment  agency whereby selling is stipulated to take place for a profit not less than a specified proportion. And hence, the agent (or the Mudarib)  doesn't guarantee that proportion, but his guarantee is limited to any amount less than the price of a similar fungible good.



618





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

6/4 Appointing a sub-agent

The agent has no right to appoint a sub-agent except with the permis• sion of the principal. Once a sub-agent is appointed, his termination does not spontaneously follow the termination  of the first agent, but the principal can terminate him.

6/5 Appointing more than one agent

When more than one agent are appointed in the same contract, none of them  should become  the sole decision-maker  unless with the authorization  of principal.  If they have been appointed by separate contracts, each ofthem has the right to discharge their responsibilities independently, unless the principal requires joint action from them.

7. Expiry of Agency

7/1  The agency contract expires in the following cases:

7/1/1  The contract expires when the principal or the agent dies or loses legal capacity or when the Institution undergoes bankruptcy or liquidation.

7/1/2 When the principal terminates the agent or the latter resigns.
In case of termination, the principal has to inform the agent [see item 4/2/7], for compensation ofloss resulting from refusal by the agent to continue the work, or forced discontinuation of work imposed by the principal before the expiration ofcontract or agency term, in regard to the consequent remuneration  or damage compensation.

7/1/3 When the agent completes the work assigned to him in fixed•
task agency or the principal performs the task in question.

7/1/4 When the principal no longer owns the asset in question or the principal has lost the right of disposing thereof. Agency also expires if the principal has performed the work, or the subject matter of agency no longer exists.

7/1/5 At the occurrence ofthe incidence that has been stipulated for ipso facto expiry ofthe agency.



619





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

7/ 1/6 At the expiry of the contract term in temporary agency. In this case, the contract  may be extended to the required term when necessary.  [ see item 4/3]

7/2  Interminable agency remains  effective  even after the  death  of the principal  or liquidation of the Institution. It continues  up to the end of the subject matter  of agency.

8. Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

8/1  An uncommissioned agent (Fodooli) is a person who discharges (in the  absence  of any need  or urgency) the  affairs  of others without being an agent or having a right to do so by virtue of Sharf'ah.  The deal becomes subject to the rulings  on the Fodooli, even when  the acts of a real owner makes him appear an agent.

8/2  The approval or denial ofa contract concluded byan uncommissioned agent  is subject  to the  discretion  of the  owner. Approval  of such contract by the owner should also precede revocation of the contract by either  of the  two parties; otherwise, a new  contract  has  to be initiated.  If the owner  of the property  does not  approve the act of
the uncommissioned agent, the act becomes binding  to the latter, if
he did not declare at the time of signing the contract that he had no authority.

8/3  The rulings on the uncommissioned agent are applicable to all financial contracts, including compensatory  contracts like sale, purchase, rent and hiring contracts, donations by way of gift, and investment agency contracts.

8/4 When the owner ofthe asset approves the act ofthe uncommissioned agent, the contract  becomes  effective, and subject to all rulings  on agency. The approval  shall be retroactively  effective, based  on the date of such an act.

9. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 23 Rabi' I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 30
April 2005 A.D.



620





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted the Shari'ah Standard on Agency and the Act ofAn Uncommissioned Agent in its meeting No. (14) held in Dubai on 21•
22 Rabi' I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 30 April- 2 May 2005 A.D.













































621





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board decided in its meeting No. (10), held on 2-7 Rabi' I, 1424 A.H., corresponding to 3-8 May 2001 A.D., in Al-Madinah Al• Munawwarah to issue a Sharf'ah Standard on Agency and  the  Act of Uncommissioned Agent.

On 17 Sha'ban 1423 A.H., corresponding  to 13 October 2002 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee decided to commission a Sharf'ah consultant to prepare a draft standard  on Agency and the Act of Uncommissioned Agent.

In its meeting No.  (10) held on Friday and Saturday 26-27 Safar 1425
A.H., corrsponding  to 16-17 April 2004A.D., in the Kingdom Of Bahrain, the Shari'ah Standards Committee  (2) discussed the Shari'ah study and advised the consultant to make necessary changes in light ofthe discussions and observations of its members.

In its  meeting No.  (11) held on Wednesday  28 Rabi' II,  1425 A.H., corrsponding to 16 June 2004 A.D., in Dubai (U.A.E), the Sharf'ah Standards Committee  (2)  discussed the draft Standard on Agency and the Act of Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli) and introduced some changes thereto in light of the discussions and observations ofthe members.

Once again, the committee discussed the draft standard in its meeting held on 24-25 Rajah 1425 A.H., corresponding to 9-10 September 2004
A.D., and made further changes in light ofthe discussions and observations of its members.

The revised draft of the standard  was then submitted  to the Shari'ah
Board in its meeting No. (13) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 26-30



622





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

Sha'ban 1425 A.H., corresponding to 10-14 October 2004 A.D. The Board made some changes in the document  and decided to send the amended document to a number of experts for their comments before discussing it in a public hearing.

A public hearing was held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 15 Safar 1426
A.H., cooresponding to 25 March 2005 A.D., and attended by more than 35 participants representing central banks, financial Institutions, accounting firms, Sharf'ah scholars, academics and other concerned parties. Several comments were made before and after the public hearing. Some members of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) responded to the quires made during the session.

In the meeting of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2), held in the Kingdom ofBahrain on 15-16 Safar 1426 A.H., corresponding to 25•
26 March 2005 A.D., the comments made during the public hearing were discussed and some changes were made to the document.

The Shari'ah Board convened its meeting No. (14) on 21-23 Rabi' I, 1426
A.H., corresponding to 30 April- 2 May 2005 A.D., held in Dubai (U.A.E)
and adopted the Standard



























623





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


• Permissibility of agency by Sharf'ah is demonstrated in the noble Qur'an, where Allah, Exalted be He, says: {"..So send one ofyou with this silver coin ofyours to the town, and let himfind out which is the good lawful food.."}. Similitude of this incidence to agency is that the one who was sent to the town to buy the food was the agent ofthe others.In Sunnah,
a Hadith was narrated  by Urwah Al-Bariqi (may Allah be pleased with
him) who said that the Prophet (peace be upon him) had given him one dinar to purchase a sacrificial sheep for the Prophet, an incidence that involves agency. As regards to ljma' (consensus of Fuqaha), the author of
the "AL-Bahr Al-Zakhkhar" and others have demonstrated permissibility of agency. Also, in common sense agency is well demonstrated in terms of the help of others that one may sometimes need, especially for things that he cannot do himself.6
• Permissibility of initiating agency in any wording which indicates initiation thereof is based on the fiqh principle that "What matters in contracts are intentions and meanings rather than wording and constructions': Therefore, whatever indicates delegation, which is the essence of agency, is acceptable for initiating the  contract. The underlying reason for consideration of silence as acceptance in case of non-paid agency is that acceptance in this case is considered to have been given implicitly. Effectiveness ofthe agency contract can be linked to fulfillment of a certain condition or to a future date because agency is delegation of power rather than an act of ownership

(2) [Al-Kahf (The Cave): 19].
(3) Related by Al-Bukhari, Abu Dawud and AI-Tirmidhi:  "AI-Talkhis Al-Habir" [3: 304]. (4) "Nay! Al-Awtar" [5: 352]; "Fath Al-Qadir" by Ibn Al-Humam [6:  554]; "AL-Mughni" by
Ibn Qudamah  [5: 203]; and "AL-Bahr AI-Zakhkhar".
(5) "AI-Bahr AL-Ra 'iq" by Ibn Nujaym [7: 153].
(6) "AI-Minhaj" by AI-Nawawi [2:  164]; and "Fath AL-Qadir" [6: 553].



624





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

transfer that could be required immediately. On the contrary, a person may need to tie delegation to the occurrence ofa certain incidence, or to a specific date in the future.
■  The principal  shall possess the right of disposing of the asset in question

because the agent is going to derive such right from him; hence the former cannot delegate a right that he does not own.
■  As for the detailed rulings pertaining to partial legal capacity ofthe agent, these rulings hold true for all dealings including  agency.
■  The ruling that agency should be known  to the agent is manifested in the fact that knowledge  in this case is a necessity for completion of the pro• cess of offer and acceptance,  and hence distinction between  a real agent and an uncommissioned agent.
• Imposition  of four conditions  on the subject matter of agency is necessary
to facilitate conclusion and validity of the contract that cannot be attained without  these  four  conditions  namely:  existence   of the  asset,  asset ownership  by the principal, possibility  of disposing  of the asset through agency and the absence of any Shari'ah restriction that prevents the deal.
• Permissibility  of paid agency stems from the fact that  agency is a useful work for which the agent has the right to ask remuneration. An agent who is known to be providing agency services only against payment is entitled to remuneration even when remuneration is not explicitly mentioned in the contract, because a customary practice is acceptable as long as it does not encounter a Shari'ah restriction. Non-paid agency is also permissible because it is considered, in this case, as a form of donation.
■  The justification for the clauses relating to remuneration ofthe agent is that such clauses are essential to make remuneration well known at either the time of the contract  conclusion or in the future.  Temporary  uncertainty about the exact amount  of the remuneration is overlooked because knowledge of the amount in the future will leave no room for dispute."" Permissibility of adding a certain share of the profit to the principal  remuneration rests on the fact that such addition  does not distort knowledge of the principal

(7) "AL-Lubab" by Al-Maydani [2: 139].
(8) "AL-Insaf [5: 403]; "AL-Rawdah" by AI-Nawawi  [4: 301]; "AL-Khurashr" [7: 5]; "AL-Fatawa
AL-Hamidiyyah" [1: 324] and "Tadhkirat Al-Fuqaha"" by AI-Hilli [2: 114].



625





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

amount. In this case, the commitment to offer the agent a certain share of the profit is in the sense of a pledge to offer donation. Thus, the offered share of the profit can be considered as a conditional gift, or as Ju'alah. There is another viewpoint that considers the pledged share ofthe profit as a subsidiary addition to the principal remuneration,  and concludes that in a subsidiary we can overlook what we cannot overlook in the principal.
• Agency is, originally, non-binding because it is an act of delegation that neither the principal nor the agent should be forced to continue. The exceptional cases of binding  agency have been  dealt with to preserve whatever rights  of others  involved therein. Moreover,  an exceptional treatment is also needed for paid agency that should be subjected to the rulings on Ijarah, as well as the case when there is a pledge not to revoke the contract within a specific period because breaching such commit• ment may cause injury to others.
■  It is permissible to specify a time limit for agency, because agency is nothing but a contract that could have a specific duration, like Ijarah for instance. The justification for defining the commitments of the principal and the
agent is - as set out in the Standard- the need to honor contractual obli•
gations of agency and pursue the acts and liabilities that emerge from it.
■  The agent is considered as a trustee in holding the asset because he works for the interest of others (the principal)  and trusteeship  is the normal status in similar engagements. Moreover, the principal's act of choosing the agent for the purpose in question is an indication of his good faith on him, and therefore the principal should not reverse that good faith, except for misconduct, negligence or breach of the contract's limitations.
• Impermissibility ofcombining agency and guarantee in the same contract, is based  on their  opposing  implications,  in addition  to the  fact that guarantee by the agent entails a suspicion of Riba (usury). Therefore, the status of the agent as a trustee contradicts with provision of guarantee.
• Impermissibility for the agent to represent both parties to the contract -•
as per the Hanafi School and the predominant view in the Shafi'i School
- is to avoid assigning both offer and acceptance to the same party,  and hence prevent any probable self bias. Adopting the viewpoint of these two Schools is, therefore, most suitable for Institutions to avoid malpractices and



626





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)

misleading formalism in making transactions and prevent overlapping of guarantees.
• Monitoring of the contract's provisions is assigned to the principal because he is the principal party  of the contract,  whereas  the agent, who is just a contractor, has to monitor  the activities of the contract.
■  Suspension of an agent act that breach the contract without adding to the benefit of the principal, until obtaining the principal's approval conforms to the normal Sharf'ah practice of exerting the best possible effort to rectify an act of a Muslim."The act here remains pending approval of the princi• pal to safeguard him against injury.
■  An agent who breaches the contract by selling or buying at a price other than  the price agreed upon has to indemnify  the principal  for the diffe• rence between  the price he accepted/offered, and the market price. The justification for this ruling is the need to establish justice and compensate the principal for loss, without  committing the Shari'ah-banned practice of accepting capital on pre-fixed return, which entails a suspicion ofRiba. This case has been discussed in "Al-Mughni" by Ibn Qudamah, who refer• red also to another viewpoint that suggests revocation of the deal.
• Agency in selling a mortgaged asset is treated as an exceptional case where the contract does not expire on the death ofthe agent (agency to be pursued by inheritors), in order to preserve the rights of the mortgagee. Moreover, such agency is originally irrevocable before fulfillm ent of its purpose, for thereto is attached others' rights.
■  The justification  for adopting  the fiqh viewpoint that  advocates suspen• ding the act of the uncommissioned agent rather than  revoking the deal (for uncertainty about its confirmation  by the principal), is the fact that an act ofa Muslim should, as far as possible, be preserved from cancellation. Preservation  of the act against cancellation is possible here through  sus• pension, in addition to the fact that the act may prove to be useful to the

(9) "A1-Mughni" by Ibn Qudamah  [5: 135-136].
(10) Ibid.
(11) In "Al-Bada'r" [5:  177)], it is stated: "The act of the Muslim should, as far as possible, be perceived as correct; and in "Fath AI-Qadir" [2: 445], it is stated: "Making the best possible effort to rectify the act of the Muslim.



627





Sharf'ah Standard No. (23): Agency and the Act of an Uncommis sioned Agent (Fodooli)

owner of the property in question. In this connection, Ibn AI-Humam said: "When the case is viewed from the standpoint of Gharar (uncer• tainty),  the contract appears to be invalid, whereas if it is viewed from the standpoint  of benefit and absence of harm the contract appears to be permissible.  Therefore, Ibnul Humam supports reconciliation of the two standpoints by suggesting permissibility with suspension     It has also been narrated that the Prophet (peace be upon him) said:  "Whoever can offer a benefit to his Muslim  brother, should  do so". If, however, the act turned to be harmful to the principal, he can revoke it by virtue of the right he has.
Moreover, permissibility of suspending the act of the uncommissioned agent until approval of the principal can also be derived from the Hadith narrated by Hakim Ibn Hizam (May Allah be pleased with him) stating that the Prophet (peace be upon him) gave him one dinar so as to buy a sheep that the Prophet (peace be upon him) wanted to sacrifice. Hakim purchased the sheep for one dinar and sold it for two. Then he purchased another sheep for the Prophet (peace be upon him) for one dinar and handed over the remaining dinar to him. The Prophet (peace be upon him) took the remaining dinar and spent it on charity and then prayed to Allah to bless Hakim's trading business.(




















(12)  "Fath A1-Qadir" [5: 317].
(13) Related by Abu Dawud and AI-Tirmidhi.



628
























Shari'ah Standard No. (24)




Syndicated Financing












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                             633
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................        634

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               634
2. Definition of Syndicated Financing.......................................................       634
3. Projects Financed Through Syndication                                                   634
4. Modes of Providing Syndicated Financing to Customers...................       634
5. Participation ofInstitutions  with Conventional Banks in Syndicated
Financing...................................................................................................       634
6.  Shari'ah-Compliant Methods of Arranging the Relationship Between
the Syndication Parties                                                                             635
7. Preparatory Tasks and Commissions.....................................................       636
8.  Provision of Guarantee and Suretyship by the Syndication Manager...        636
9. Exchange Rates..........................................................................................       637
10. Exit in Syndicated Financing.................................................................        637
11. Date of Issuance of the Standard...........................................................       638
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        639
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        640
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard....................................        642
















631








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


The  purpose  of this  standard  is to  highlight  syndicated  financing operations  that take place either between Islamic financial Institutions (Institution/Institutions),"or between these Institutions and conventional banks.































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



633





S h arf 'ah     S tan d ar d N o . (2 4 ) : S yn di ca t e d F in an c in g





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard  covers syndicated financing  operations, whether  those arranged among Institutions, or between them and conventional banks, and the Institution-agent relationships relating to such operations.

2. Definition of Syndicated Financing

It refers to the participation  of a group ofinstitutions  in a joint financing operation  through  one of the Shari'ah-compliant modes of financing. The accounts ofthe syndicated financing operation are kept independent from the accounts of the participating Institutions.

3. Projects Financed Through Syndication

Syndicated financing should be channeled towards investment activities that are permissible in Shari'ah. It should not be totally or partially directed towards projects that encounter Shari'ah restriction or constitute Riba.

4. Modes of Providing Syndicated Financing to Customers

Syndicated financing should be provided to customers through Shari'ah•
compliant modes of financing, including the following:

4/1   Sale through bargaining, Murabahah or installments.
4/2   Ijarah and ljarah Muntahia Bittamleek.
4/3   Salam and Parallel Salam.
4/4   Istisna'a and Parallel lstisna'a.
4/5   Mudarabah.
4/6   Muzara'ah, Musaqat and Mugharasah.
4/7   Investment Sukuk.

5. Participation of the Institutions with Conventional Banks in Syndicated
Financing

5/1  Originally, syndicated financing shall take place among Islamic finan•
cial Institutions.



634





S h arf 'ah S tan d ar d N o .  ( 2 4 ) : S yn di ca t e d F in an c in g

5/2  There is no Sharf'ah restriction  against participation  of conventional banks  and Islamic financial Institutions  in syndicated financing, as long as subscription  and utilization of funds are arranged according to Sharf'ah-compliant forms.

5/3  Originally, the syndication  should be led by an Islamic financial In• stitution. However, there is no Shari'ah restriction against appointing a conventional bank to lead the syndication and initiate, on its own or with Islamic financial Institutions, the mechanisms and conditions of operation  management.  Assigning the role of the Musharakah  lead manager to a conventional bank as indicated above is acceptable only if the contracts, projects financed and the modes of financing are all Sharf'ah-compliant.

5/4  Arrangement, implementation  and follow up of syndicated financing operations  should  take place under  supervision  of the  Shari'ah su• pervisory boards of the Institutions  participating  in the syndication. Preferably, a joint  committee  of the  Shari'ah supervisory  boards  of these Institutions  could be formed and delegated to make decisions that become binding to all parties.

5/5 It is not prohibited  for Islamic financial Institutions  to provide syn• dicated financing  to certain  parts  of a project  that  also receives fi• nancing for its remaining parts from other sources through  conven• tional modes. This could be done on condition that the accounts and lead manager  arrangements  of the two types of financing  are kept separate.  It is well known  that  usurious  lending  and  borrowing  is a Shari'ah-impermissible practice and the responsibility thereof falls right on the party who commits it.
6. Shari'ah-Compliant Methods ofArranging the Relationship Between the Syndication Parties

The relationship between  the Institutions  participating in a syndicated financing operation  may be arranged in one of the following forms:

6/1  Mudarabah: The syndication manager acts as a Mudarib and becomes the exclusive operation manager according to the Mudarabah contract. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (13) on Mudarabah, item 8/9]



635





S h arf 'ah S tan d ar d N o .  ( 2 4 ) : S yn di ca t e d F in an c in g

6/2 Musharakah: The  institutions participate jointly  in providing  the funds  and  bearing  any losses proportionately, whereas  profits  are shared as agreed upon. In this case, the Institutions may select a joint committee  to undertake management, or they may delegate one of them to manage the company against an increase in its profit share or a lump  sum payment.  A separate management contract in this case should be signed with the selected Institution. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (12) on Sharikah (Musharakah) and Modern  corporations]
6/3  Paid agency: In this case, the work to be done should be clearly defined, along with estimation of the period of agency. The agent shall become entitled to remuneration whether profit is actually materialized or not Furthermore, the agent may be given a bonus as a lump sum amount or a share of profits above a certain limit. [See Sharf'ah Standard No. (23) on Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned  Agent (Fodooli)]
6/4 Non-paid agency: The lead manager in this case undertakes to manage the operations for no reward, and the financing Institutions  share the profit
7. Preparatory Tasks and Commissions

7/1  It is permissible for the leading Institution to receive commission  for performing the preparatory tasks such as conducting  feasibility stud• ies, organization,  mobilization  ofparticipatory funds, preparations of contracts etc. The commission  thus obtained may be equal to, less or more than the actual cost the Institution incurs for carrying out such tasks. Furthermore, an Institution performing such tasks against the commission  may or may not be a lead manager.

7/2 Musharakah It is not permissible to receive commitment commission. [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (17) on Investment Sukuk  and Sharf'ah Standard  No. (8) on Mudarabah, item 2/4/1]

8. Provision of Guarantee and Suretyship by the Syndication Manager

8/1  In  dealing  with  the  syndication  funds  the  lead  manager   (being a Mudarib, partner or an agent) is considered as a trustee, and there• fore he should  not guarantee  these funds  except in case of miscon•



636





S h arf 'ah S tan d ar d N o .  ( 2 4 ) : S yn di ca t e d F in an c in g

duct, negligence or breach of conditions embodied in syndication arrangement.  [see  Shari'ah Standard No.  (5) on Guarantees,  item
2/2/2]

8/2 It is not permissible for the Institution  that manages the syndica• tion as a Mudarib, partner  or an agent to guarantee the debtors of his partners, or to guarantee  the contributions  of these partners against exchange rate fluctuations.  [see Sharf'ah Standard No.  (5) on Guarantees and Shari'ah Standard No.  (23) on Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)]

9. Exchange Rates

9/1  A specific currency should be fixed for the syndicated financing oper• ation. However, the participating parties may pay their contributions in other currencies on condition of revaluating the contributions in terms ofthe syndication currency, and according to the prevailing ex• change rate on the same day of contributions payment.

9/2 It is permissible for any ofthe participating Institutions to receive all its profits and entitlements in a currency other than the currency of the syndication on the condition ofrevaluing the receipts in terms of syndication currency and, according to the prevailing exchange rate on the day of receiving such amounts.

9/3 It is impermissible for the investment agent or any other party of the Musharakah or the Mudarabah to provide a commitment to safeguard any other  party  against exchange rate fluctuations.  [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (1) on Trading in Currencies, item 2/9/3]

10. Exit in Syndicated Financing

10/ 1   It is permissible to agree on a closed syndicated financing operation that does not allow premature exit.

10/2 It is permissible for an Institution to dispose of its share in the in• vestment to an external or internal party before liquidation, as per the contract conditions, and at the value agreed upon, if the physical assets and usufructs of the company exceed its cash money, debts and financial rights. If the company's cash money, debts and finan•



637





S h arf 'ah S tan d ar d N o .  ( 2 4 ) : S yn di ca t e d F in an c in g

cial rights are predominant,  Sharf'ah rulings on currency exchange and debt-related transactions  should be referred to and applied.  It is, however, not permissible to agree beforehand on such transfer of shares at nominal value or on guarantee of a certain limit of profits. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (17) on Investment  Sukuk and Shari'ah Standard No. (21) on Financial Paper (Shares and Bonds)]

11. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 23 Rabi' I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 2 May
2005A.D.










































638





S h arf 'ah S tan d ar d N o .  ( 2 4 ) : S yn di ca t e d F in an c in g





Adoption of the Standard


The Sharf'ah  standard  on Syndicated  Financing was adopted by the
Sharf'ah Board in its meeting No.  (14)   held in Dubai on 21-22 Rabi' I,
1426 A.H., corresponding to 30 April - 2 May 2005 A.D.













































639





S h arf 'ah S tan d ar d N o .  ( 2 4 ) : S yn di ca t e d F in an c in g





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board decided in its meeting No. (10) held on 2-7 Rabi' I,  1424 A.H., corresponding to 3-8 May 2001 A.D., in Al-Madinah Al• Munawwarah to issue a Shari'ah Standard on Syndicated Financing.

On 7 Dhul-Hajjah 1424 A.H., corresponding to 29 January 2004 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee decided to appoint a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a draft standard on Syndicated Financing.

In its meeting No. (11) held on 25-26 Safar 1425 A.H., corresponding to
15-16 April 2004 A.D., in the Kingdom Of Bahrain, the Shari'ah Standards Committee (1) discussed the Shari'ah study and advised the consultant to make necessary changes in the light of the discussions and observations of its members.

In its meeting No. (12) held on 28 Rabi' II, 1425 A.H., corresponding to
16 June 2004 A.D., in Dubai (U.A.E) the Shari'ah Standards Committee (1) discussed the draft Standard on Syndicated Financing, introduced  some changes and asked the consultant to make further necessary changes in the light ofthe discussions and observations of its members.

Once again, the committee discussed the draft standard in its meeting held on 24-25 Rajab 1425 A.H., corresponding to 9-10 September 2004 A.D., and made further changes in the light ofthe discussions and observations of its members.

The revised draft of the standard was then submitted to the Sharf'ah
Board in its meeting No. (13) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 26-30
Sha'ban 1425 A.H., corresponding to 10-14 October 2004 A.D. The Board made some changes in the document  and decided to present it to some experts for their comments before discussing it in a public hearing.



640





S h arf 'ah S tan d ar d N o .  ( 2 4 ) : S yn di ca t e d F in an c in g

A public hearing was held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 15 Safar 1426
A.H., corresponding to 25 March 2005 A.D., and attended by more than 35 participants representing central banks, financial Institutions, accounting firms, Shariah scholars, academics and other concerned parties. Several comments were made before and after the public hearing. Some members of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) responded to the quires made during the session.

In the meeting of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2), held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 15-16 Safar  1426 A.H., corresponding to
25-26 March 2005 A.D., the comments made during the public hearing
were discussed and some changes were made in the document.

The Shari'ah Board held its meeting No. (14) on 21-23 Rabf' I, 1426 A.H.,
4 April - 2 May 2005 A.D., in Dubai (U.A.E) and adopted the Standard.




































641





Sharf 'ah Stan dard No.  (24): Syn dicated Financing





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Permissibility of Syndicated Financing
•  Permissibility  of syndicated  financing  is derived  from  Musharakah, which encounters no Shari'ah restriction.
Projects Financed Through Syndication
•  The ruling that syndicated financing should be directed only towards ac• tivities that do not entail dealing in a Shari'ah-impermissible commodity or service, is dictated by the need to abide by the directives outlined in the Holy Qur'an verses and the noble Hadith of the Prophet (peace be upon him). These divine sources prohibit usury, alcoholic drinks, drugs, gam• bling, pork, illegitimate carcasses, prostitution, nightclubs, statues, etc, as well as impermissible acts like deception, bribe,  cheating in weight and measurement, and all types ofprohibited sales, etc.@
Participation of Institutions with Conventional Banks in Syndicated Financing, and Permissibility ofAssigning the Role ofthe Lead Manager to a Conventional Bank
■    Partnership between a Muslim and a Non-Muslim is not prohibited or cannot be judged right away as invalid, except in case of Shari'ah-banned dealings.  This is  so because what  really matters  is the  conformity  of the deal in question to the rulings of Shari'ah,  rather than whether the deal has been made by a Muslim or a Non-Muslim. This viewpoint has been adopted by the Al Baraka Seminar"  as well as the Fourth Fiqhi

(2) For a detailed account of prohibited  dealings, their various modern  forms, and the Shari'ah bases oftheir prohibition. See: Dr. Ahmad Muhiddin Ahmad: Operations of Islamic Investment Companies in the International Market, (pp. 27-43).
(3) The text of the Fiqhi opinion is "There is no Sharf'ah restriction  on participation
of conventional  banks with Islamic banks in a syndicated financing that  observes Shari'ah rulings in its operations, on condition that conventional banks should not assume the entire task of managing the operations, or making decisions on Shari'ah related issues.", Resolution No. (9/1), The Fatawa ofthe Al Baraka Seminars (P.  151).



642





Sharf'ah Standard No. (24): Syndicated Financing

Seminar of the Kuwait Finance House (1995). This case also does not come under  the Hadith stating that the Prophet  (peace be upon him) prohibited  involiving in partnership  with a Jew or a Christian  unless purchase and sale take place by the hands of the Muslim.It is clear that the emphasis of prohibition here relates to avoidance of Riba and invalid contracts,  and therefore,  no justification for prohibition will remain if due preventive measures against prohibited practices are well catered for. Also, the viewpoint of the Shafi'i, Maliki, Hanbali and Hanafi  Schools6° who advocate Karahah (disinclination towards the deal) does not include this case. The reason is that the Musharakah can avoid Shari'ah-banned practices by explicit reference to the firm commitment ofthe conventional Institution that leads the syndication to Sharf'ah rulings in transactions, besides tightening the control and supervision ofthe Sharf'ah boards ofthe participating Institutions throughout the various stages of the syndicated financing operation.
Preparatory Tasks and Commissions
•  Permissibility  of receiving  commissions  for performing  preparatory tasks, originates from the fact that such tasks are beneficial to the partners and do not embark on any Shari'ah-impermissible practice. As regards the justification for the ruling that the commission can be equal to, less or more than the actual cost ofproviding the tasks, it is because the two parties are free to make what is known as a permissible condition, or resort to mutual consent. This same viewpoint was the Fiqhi opinion of the Al Barak.a Seminar as well as the Fiqhi Seminar of the Kuwait Finance House (1995).°

(4) See:  "AI-Majmuw' Sharh AL-Muhadhdhab" [14: 93].
(5) Ibn Qudamah, "AL-Mughni" (Part 4); Al Nawawi, "Al-Majmu" [13: 504];  Al-Buhuti, "Sharh Muntaha  Al-Iradat  [2:   319];    "AL-Mudawwanah"  [5:   70];  and  Al-Kasani, "Bada 'r' AI-Sana'r" [6: 61].
(6) The text of the Fiqhi opinion of the Al Baraka Seminar is "The preparatory tasks performed by the bank that creates the operation entitles it to a remuneration which could be equal to, less or more than the actual cost ofperforming the tasks': The Fiqhi opinion of the Fourth Seminar of the Kuwait Finance House is "The preparatory tasks performed by the bank that initiates the operation entitles it to remuneration to be determined through mutual consent, whether the bank has been assigned the role of management or not."



643





Sharf'ah Standard No. (24): Syndicated Financing

•  Receiving commitment commission is prohibited because such commis• sion is paid for exercising the right of contracting, which is a matter of will and desire, rather than a subject matter of compensatory deals•
Provision  of Guarantee and Suretyship by the Lead bank
■    A lead bankshould not provide guarantee except in case ofmisconduct and negligence. Being a partner in the operation, it is supposed to be holding the assets as a trustee, and hence, it should not provide any guarantee. Stating such guarantee in the contract constitutes a violation ofthe Shari'ah rulings on trusteeship.  When the managing bank commits misconduct or negligence, or resort to fraud and trickery in the studies it prepares, it should then indemnifythe partners for the injury it has deliberately caused to them.
■    A bank that manages the syndication through Mudarabah or Musharakah should not provide a warranty cover against default of the debtors of its partners, or guarantee the contributions ofthese partners against exchange rate fluctuations, because provision ofguarantee by a partner or a Mudarib to his other partners/owners ofthe capital is prohibited by Sharf'ah.
■    When  the bank manages the syndication  as an agent,  it may provide a warranty cover for the debtors ofhis partners in a separate contract and without  referring to warranty  in the agency contract.  The justification here is that the bank does not provide such warranty in its capacity as an agent of the partners, and the warranty thus provided against default of the debtors will remain valid even if the agency contract is revoked.
Exchange Rates
■    Permissibility for the parties ofthe syndication to make their contributions in currencies other than that of the syndication on condition that such contributions be revaluated according to the prevailing exchange rates is derived from a Hadith narrated by Ibn Umar (may Allah be pleased with him). Ibn Umar said: "When I told the Messenger ofAllah (peace be upon him) that I used to sell camels at Al-Baqi' in dinars and receive the value in dirhams, he (peace be upon him) said: 'No harm ifyou apply the exchange rate of the same day andfinalize the deal with your partner before leaving

(7) Sharf'ah Standards, AAOIFI, Shari'ah Standard on Murabahah.



644





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (24): Syndicated Financing

each other'?9 This case also implies combining currency exchange and Hawalah (transfer of money), which has been approved by a resolution of the Islamic Fiqh Academy."
■    The Hadith narrated by lbn Umar also justifies the fiqhi opinion that the participating Institutions can stipulate receiving their profits and other en• titlements in a currency other than that of the syndication, and according to the prevailing exchange rate on the day of receiving such profits and entitlements.
•  Prohibition of commitment of one party of the Musharakah or Muda• rabah to safeguard the other party against exchange rate fluctuations is because such commitment leads to the impermissible case of a partner or a Mudarib provides to the other partner guarantee against loss of capital.
Controls on Disassociation
■   Participating  Institutions  can agree on a closed syndicated financing operation  where premature  exit is not  allowed. Such a condition  is regarded as a proper condition in Shari'ah, and it does not contradict with the aim of the contract. Moreover, imposing a condition  against premature exit does not lead to permitting what Sharf'ah has prohibited or prohibiting what it has permitted, nor does it seem to be a probable cause of future dispute.(Therefore such condition should be honored in abidance to the divine order of Allah,  Exalted be He,  in the holy Qur'an: {"O you who believe! Fulfill (all) obligations..?)0
■   Agreement  beforehand  on exit at nominal  value or on guaranteeing a certain amount of profit is prohibited because such condition entails exact Riba,  or a suspicion of it. Moreover,  it involves other Sharf'ah•

(8) Related byAbuDawud, Al-Nasa'i, Ibn Majah andAl-Hakimwho deemed it authentic. Al• Zahabi agreed with Al-Hakim. The Hadith has been narrated both as Marfil (Traceable) Hadith to the Prophet, and Mawquf (Discontinued) Hadith to Ibn Umar, iil-Talkhis Al• Habir" [3: 29].
(9) International Islamic Fiqh Academy Resolution No. 184/9.
(10) Regarding contractual conditions see:  "Tabyin Al-Haqa 'iq" [4:  43]; Ibn Al-Humam, "Sharh Fath AI-Qadir" [5·215]; AI-Buhuti, "KashshafAl-Qina" [3: 192-193]; Al Nawawi, "Al-Majmu' Sharh AL-Muhadhdhab"  [9:  364-368]; and "Al-Khurashi  'Ala Mukhtasar Khalil" [5: 80-81].
(11) [Al-Ma' idah (The Table): l].



645





S h arf 'ah     S tan d ar d N o . (2 4 ) : S yn di ca t e d F in an c in g

impermissible practices like the case ofone partyproviding a guarantee againstthe loss ofthe share ofthe otherpartyinthe capital, or guarantees a predetermined rate of profit for him.





















































646

























Shari'ah Standard No. (25)



Combination of Contracts












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                             651
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................       452

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               452
2. Concept of Combination of Contracts                                                     452
3. Shari'ah Status of Combination of Contracts                                            653
4. Shari'ah Controls on Combination of Contracts..................................       653
5. Shari'ah Concession for Combination of Contracts                                 654
6. Prior Agreement (Muwata' ah) for Combination of Contracts..........       655
7.  Contemporary Applications and General Rules for Combination  of
Contracts.                                                                                                 657
8. Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................       657
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        658
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        659
Appendix (b):  The Sharf'ah Basis for the Standard.....................................        661
Appendix (c):  Definitions..............................................................................       669




















649








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


The purpose of this standard is to explain the process of combining more than one contract in one set. The Standard also aims to elucidate the characteristics, Shari'ah status and Shari'ah controls relating to the process of Contracts' Combining. Furthermore, the Standard indicates the Sharf'ah rulings on Muwata' ah (prior  agreement) and provides guidance on the main applications of combined contracts in Islamic financial Institutions (Institution/Institutions).



























(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



651





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (25): Combination of Contracts





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard covers transactions  that comprise more than one contract combined together in one set. The scope of the discussion in this respect covers the  definition,  forms, controls,  characteristics, and  concessions relating  to the  process  of Combination   of Contracts  and  explores the characteristics of Muwata 'ah and the Shari'ah rulings pertaining  thereto. The discussion also embarks on contemporary applications of combined contracts.

2. Concept of Combination of Contracts

2/1  Combination of contracts  is a process that takes place between two parties  or more, and  entails the  simultaneous  conclusion  of more than one contract. Hence, combination  of contracts  may take any of the following forms:

2/1/1 Combining  more than  one contract  without  imposing  any of them as a condition  in the other, and without prior agreement (Muwata 'ah) to do so.

2/1/2 Combining more than  one contract  while imposing  some of them  as conditions  in the others, without  prior  agreement  to doso.

2/1/3 Combining  more than one contract subject to prior agreement (Muwata' ah), but without imposing any ofthem as a condition in the others.

2/1/4 Agreement to conclude the deal through  any of different con•
tractual  forms as will be finally decided in the future.

2/2 Forms of combined contracts

2/2/1  Combined contracts may have a single lump sum counter value.
For instance, a party may sell his piece of land to the other and



652





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (25): Combination of Contracts

simultaneously rents his car to the same party for one month, both against one thousand dinars.
2/2/2 Combined  contracts  may be concluded for separate values.
For instance, one party may sell his house to the other for one thousand  dinars, and rent his car to the same party for one hundred  dinars per month.

2/2/3 Some ofthe combined contracts may be stipulated as conditions in the other contracts.  One party, for instance, may say to the other party that I will sell you my house for ten thousand dinars, on condition that you undertake to rent the house to me for two years for one thousand dinars per year.  The sale of the house in this manner could also be concluded on condition that the buyer of the house undertakes in return to sell his car to the seller for two thousand dinars.

2/2/4 Combined contracts may take the form of an exhaustive con• tractual statement comprising a number ofsuccessive parts and stages, which finally lead to realization of the desire of the two parties to conclude the deal in question. A good example in this regard may be seen in a number of present day financial transactions like ljarah Muntahia Bittamleek, Murabahah, and Diminishing Musharakah.

3. Shari'ah Status of Combination  of Contracts

It is permissible in Shari'ah to combine more than one contract in one set, without imposing one contract as a condition in the other, and provided that  each contract  is permissible on its own.  Combining  contracts in this manner is acceptable unless it encounters a Shari'ah restriction that entails its prohibition on exceptional basis.

4. Shari'ah Controls on Combination of Contracts

4/1  Contracts' combining should not include the cases that are explicitly banned by Sharf'ah like combing sale and lending in one contract.

4/2 It should notbe used as a trickfor committing Riba such as agreement between two parties to practice Bay' al-'Inah or Riba al-Fadl.



653





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (25): Combination of Contracts

4/3 It should not be used as  an excuse for practicing Riha. The two parties could misuse, for instance, Contracts' Combining when they conclude a lending contract that, at the same time, facilitates some other compensatory gains to them. For example, they could stipulate in the contract that the borrower should offer accommodation  in his house to the lender, or should grant him a present. Contracts' Combining could also be misused by imposing excess repayment in terms of quantity or quality on the borrower.  [see Shari'ah Standard No. (14) on Loan (Qard) - item 1/4]

4/4 Combined  contracts should not reveal disparity or contradiction with regard to their underlying rulings and ultimate goals. Examples of contradictory  contracts include granting an asset to somebody as a gift and selling/leasing it to him simultaneously, or combining Mudarabah  with lending  the Mudarabah  capital to the Mudarib, or currency exchange with Ju'alah, or Salam with Ju'alah for the same contract value, or leasing with selling (i.e. hire-purchase in its traditional form).

5. Shari'ah Concessions  for Combination of Contracts

5/1  In principle, the Shari'ah concessions that can be granted to implicit and subsidiary contracts at the time of combining contracts cannot be granted to the same contracts when concluded independently. Here, implicit and subsidiary contracts refer to contractual commitments that  are not explicitly embodied  in the deal agreement  or those which succeed the original commitments  of the transaction. The concessions to be granted in this case should be judged in the light oftraditions, practice and professional experience, and subjected to clearance by the Shari'ah Supervisory Board of the Institution.

5/2 Concessions granted to implicit and subsidiary contracts comprise relieffrom the following impermissible acts:

5/2/1  Gharar, which affects financial contracts, may be overlooked in implicit and subsidiary contracts.
5/2/2 Jahalah, which also affects financial contracts, may be ignored with regard to the object of a subsidiary contract.



654





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (25): Combination of Contracts

5/2/3 Sale-based  Riha and violation  of currency exchange  rules (as when  spot delivery  is ignored  in  a contract that  combines currency exchange  with  money  transfer)  are also forgivable in subsidiary and implicit  contracts.

5/2/4 Selling of a debt for another debt may be ignored when it comes in the context of a subsidiary contract A fitting example here is purchasing  (on debt) the shares of an indebted  company.

5/2/5 Subsidiary and implicit contracts  may also relieved from some prerequisites that  underline the validity of contracts  (such as offer and acceptance)  when  such relief is dictated by need or desire to achieve a permissible interest.
6. Prior Agreement (Muwata'ah) for Combination of Contracts

6/1  Muwata'ah or Tawatu'  in Fiqh terminology has several meanings;
most important among which  are stated below:

6/1/1  Explicit or implicit intention ofthe parties to the contract to use a certain  trick for practicing  Riha through  a Shari'ah accepted contractual  form.

6/1/2 An unrevealed prior agreement between the two parties to per• form a Shari'ah-permissible act or deal for the sake of finding a Shari'ah-accepted exit (acceptable trick).

6/1/3  Coincidence  of the intentions of parties  to the contract  at the stage of preparatory negotiations that  precede  the  signing  of the contract  as indicated  in item (2/2/4) above.
6/2  In Fiqh perception, Muwata' ah for combining contracts  has three distinct  characteristics:

6/2/1 It is an agreement between  two parties  to conclude  contracts and fulfill pledges in the future.

6/2/2  When Muwata 'ah is stipulated as part ofthe contract it becomes a condition precedent to the conclusion of the contract, and the contract  becomes  subject to the relevant Shari'ah rulings with regard to permissibility, enforceability, and validity.



655





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (25): Combination of Contracts

6/2/3 Enforceability of Muwata'ah in Shari'ah is similar to enforce• ability of conditions  precedent  to the  signing of contracts. A condition that precedes the signing of the contract has the same validity and binding nature of the normal conditions of the contract, since the former constitutes the bases ofthe con• tract that have been mutually  agreed upon between the two parties.

6/3 Muwata'ah to combine contracts takes several forms, which may be grouped into the following four types:

6/3/1 Muwata'ah to form up Riba tricks, in which the two parties agree to practice, for instance, Bay' al-'Inah or its reverse, or Bay' al-Wafa' (Bay' al-Raja), or Riba al-Fadl. In this case, Shari'ah prohibits Muwata' ah and the contract so designed is invalid.

6/3/2 Muwata'ah for Riha excuses is prohibited by Shari'ah whereby the two parties agree to combine a loan with another transaction, or stipulate that the borrower has to present a gift to the lender, or make excess repayment in terms ofquantity or quality.

6/3/2/1 Prohibition  of Muwata'ah to use such tricks, which are permissible in principle, should be judged in the light of two conditions:

First, the intention to use the permissible act as a means of concluding a prohibited deal should be obvious and beyond all doubts.

Second, there  should be no obvious need or lawful interest that justifies resorting to such a trick.

6/3/3 Muwata ah for obtaining Shari'ah Exits, which refers to tricks that do not violate Shari'ah rules, or contradict  with Sharf'ah objectives, or result in any harm to others, is permissible.

6/3/4 Muwata'ah for combining contracts that contradict to or op• pose each other is prohibited because it leads to performing of an act that has been strictly banned by Shari'ah. [see item 4/4]



656





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (25): Combination of Contracts

7. Contemporary  Applications  and General Rules for Combination  of
Contracts

7/1  One ofthe most distinguishable forms ofcontemporaryfinancial trans• actions is the contractual arrangements which comprise a number of contracts and pledges that the parties agree beforehand to execute in a specific manner and according to agreed number of successive stag• es.  Such arrangements aim to achieve a given purpose or interest of the parties to the contract such as performing Murabahah on Order of Purchase, Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek, or Diminishing Musharakah.

7/2 Muwata'ah, when provided for in the contract and used for combi• nation of contracts, should be observed by, and remain binding to the parties to the contract, subject to permissible commercial and banking conventions. [see item 6/2/2]

7/3 The pledges contained in such combined contract sets are binding to their respective parties.

7/4 These newly devised sets of combined contracts should observe the general rules of Shari'ah with regard to structure, rulings, requirements and conditions in order to be Sharf'ah compliant. [see item 5/2]

7/5 These contract sets should also observe the Sharf'ah rulings pertain• ing to combination  of contracts, and may make use of the Shari'ah concessions in this respect.

7/6 Failure of any of the parties  to combined  contracts  to honor  its contractual  commitments gives the other party right  of claiming indemnity for the actual injury encountered.

8. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 23 Rabi' I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 2 May
2005A.D.










657





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (25): Combination of Contracts





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah standard on Combination of Contracts was adopted by the Shari'ah  Board in its meeting No.  (15) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 22-26 Sha'ban  1427 A.H., corresponding to 26 September - 2 October
2005A.D.











































658





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (25): Combination of Contracts





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board decided in its meeting No.  (10) held on 2-7  Rabi' I,  1424 A.H., corresponding to 3-8 May 2003 A.D., in Al-Madinah Al• Munawwarah to issue a Sharf'ah Standard on Combination of Contracts.

On 17 Sha'ban 1423 A.H., corresponding to 13 October 2003 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a draft standard on combination of contracts.

In meeting No.  (10) of the Shari'ah Standards  Committee (2) held on
Friday and Saturday 27-28 Safar 1425 A.H., corresponding 16-17 April 2004
A.D., in the Kingdom of Bahrain, the committee discussed the Shari'ah study and advised the consultant to incorporate the necessary changes, in the light ofthe discussions and observations of the meeting.

In meeting No. (11) of the Shari'ah Standard Committee (2) held on Wednesday  28  Rabi' II,  1425  A.H.,  16  June 2004 A.D., held in Dubai (U.A.E) the Committee discussed the draft standard on combination of contracts and introduced necessary changes in it in the light of discussions and comments ofthe meeting.

The revised version ofthe Standard was submitted to the Sharf'ah Board in its meeting No. (13) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 30 Sha'ban 1426
A.H., 14 October 2004 A.D., and further changes were incorporated in the document. The Board then decided to send the document to concerned experts for review and comments before discussing it in a public hearing.

AAOIFI held public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on  15  Safar
1426 A.H., corresponding to 25 March 2005 A.D. More than 35 participants representing central banks, institutions, accounting firms, Shari'ah scholars,



659





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (25): Combination of Contracts

university teachers and other interested parties attended the public hearing. Several observations were made in the public hearing to which members of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) duly responded.

In a meeting held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 15-16 Safar  1426 A.H., corresponding to 25-26 March 2005 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) discussed the comments and observations made during the public hearing, and incorporated  necessary changes in the document.

The Shari'ah Board discussed the draft standard in its meeting No.  (14)
held in Dubai  (U.A.E)  on 21-23 Rabi' I, 1426  A.H., corresponding to 30
April  - 2 May 2005 A.D.  and decided,  in the light of the comments  and observations  of the  meeting, to  send  the  draft  standard to  the  Sharf'ah Standards Committee  (2) for study.
In its meeting No. (15) held on 22-25 Sha'ban 1426 A.H., corresponding to 26-29 September 2005 A.D., in Makkah  Al-Mukarramah, the Sharf'ah Board  discussed  the  amendments  proposed   by the  Shari'ah  Standards Committee  and  the  Drafting Committee  and  made  the  changes  in  the draft  Standard,  where  it  deemed  necessary.  Consequently,  the  Sharf'ah Board approved the Standard (unanimously for some clauses and with the majority for others), as indicated  in the minutes of the Board's meetings.

























660





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (25): Combination of Contracts





Appendix  (B)

The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


■  It is permissible to combine more than one contract in a single transaction as long as each ofthese contracts is permissible on its own. This is so because freedom  of contracting  and honoring  commitments  is acknowledged  in principle by the general teachings and directives of Shari'ah, unless such contracts  and  commitments  lead to violation  of Sharf'ah  rulings. Ibn AI-Qayyim said, "It is permissible in principle  to form up contracts  and conditions, except for what has been prohibited by Sharf'ah?
• According to the majority  of the Hanafi, Shafi'i  and Hanbali Fuqaha, the set of combined contracts can always be judged in the light of its individual components. Therefore, ifthe transaction comprises a number of contracts that  each of them  individually  satisfies permissibility  requirements,  the combined set of such contracts is also permissible.
■  Based on the above fact the Hanbali and Shafi'i Fuqaha, as widely reported,
indicate permissibility ofcombing two contracts, for the same contract value, even ifthe two contracts differ with regard to Sharf'ah status and rulings. Ibn Taymiyyah indicated permissibility of combining two contracts having two separate values."°
• Prohibition  of combining contracts in specific cases on exceptional basis, as indicated by Al-Shatibi, stems from the fact that the act of combining

(2) "Majmw'Fatawa Ibn Taymiyyah" [29: 132]; and "AI-Qawa'idAl-Nuraniyyah Al-Fiqhiyyah",
(P.188).
(3) "Tlam Al-Muwaqf'in" [1: 344]; and  "Jami' AL-Rasa 'il" by Ibn Taymiyyah [2: 317].
(4) "KashshafAl-Qina" [3: 478];  A1-Bayan" by AI-Umrani [5:  148]; Al-Majmu' Sharh Al- Muhadhdhab" [9:  388];  "Tabyin AL-Haqa 'iq" [4:  174],  "AIL-Bada 'i"  [6:  58]; and "T'lam AL- Muwaqi'in" [3: 354]; "Al-Mubdi" [5: 43].
(5) "AI-Mughni" [6: 39 and 355]; "Al Majmu" [9: 388]; "Sharh Al-Sunnah" by AI-Baghawi
[8: 67].
(6) "Nazariyyat Al-'Aqd" by Ibn Taymiyyah (P. 191); and  "Al-Ikhtiyarat Al-Fiqhiyyah Min
Fatawa Ibn Taymiyyah" (P. 122).



661





Sharf'ah Stan dard No.  (25): Comb ination of Contracts

could sometimes generate Shari'ah restrictions that do not hold true when the combined acts are taken up individually. Examples ofacts that become prohibited  when  combined, though  they are individually permissible, include combining sale and lending, marrying two sisters, or marrying a woman and her aunt.
■  The absence of any exceptional Shari'ah restriction in the particular case of combining constitutes the first control on contracts' combining due to the directives of the Prophet (Peace be upon Him) who has been quoted to have prohibited combining sale with lending,"" or combining two sales in one deal, or two transaction in one transaction.(0
• The second  control,  which prohibits  using Contracts'  Combining  as a trick for practicing Riha is based on the directives of the prophet (peace be upon him) which indicate prohibition of Bay' al-'Inah  and Riba al• Fadl. As regards Riba al-Fadl, it has been reported that the Prophet (Peace be upon Him) instructed one ofhis employees to sell his low-quality dates first and then buy the high-quality dates he wanted, instead ofresorting to exchange of more quantity of low-quality dates for less quantity of high• quality dates.  Ibn Al-Qayyim said, "This indicates that the employee was directed to commence the process of purchasing the high-quality dates after the complete finalization of the former transaction; i.e., selling his low-quality dates. If, instead, he agreed beforehand with another party

(7) "A1- Muwafaqat" [3: 192].
(8) AI-Tirmidhi said: "This is a good authentic Hadith: "AL-Muwatta' "[2: 657]; "Mukhtasar Sunan Abu Dawud" by AI-Munziri  [5:  144];  "Musnad Al-Imam Ahmad" [2:  178]; "Aridat Al-Ahwazi" [5: 249];  "Sunan AL-Nasa'+" [7: 295]; and "Nay! Al-Awtar" [5: 152].
(9) Ibn Al-Arabi confirmed that these has been the directives ofthe Prophet (peace be upon Him):  "AI-Qabas"  [2: 842]; "Mukhtasar Sunan Abu Dawud" by AI-Munziri [5: 98]; "AI• Muwatta"" [2: 663]; "Aridat Al-Ahwazi" [5: 239]; "Sunan AI-Nasa 'i" [7: 295]; and "Nay! Al-Awtar" [5: 152].
(10) "Musnad AL-Imam Ahmad [1: 198]; "Nay! Al-Awtar" [5: 152];  "Fath Al-Qadir" [6: 81].
Al-Haythami said: "Ahmad always reports from reliable sources": "Majma' Al-Zawa 'id
[4: 84].
(11) "Mausnad Al-Imam Ahmad" [2: 42, 48]; "AI-Sunan AI-Kubra" by Al-Bayhaqi [5: 316]; "Subul Al-Salam" [3: 14]; "Mukhtasar Sunan Abu Dawud"  by Al-Munziri; and "Tahdhib Al-Sunan" by Ibn Al-Qayyim [5: 99, 104].
(12) Related by Al-Bukhari, Muslim, AI-Tirmidhi, Al-Nasa'i and Malik: "Sahih Al-Bukhari" [3: 97] "Sahih Muslim" [3: 1208]; "Aridat Al-Ahwadhi" [5: 249];  "Al Muwatta"" [2: 632]; and "Sunan Al-Nasa'+" [7: 244].



662





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (25): Combination of Contracts

to conduct the two deals successively, the second contract will not become an independent  contract, because it is a mere completion of the first one. The directives ofthe Prophet (Peace be upon Him), apparently necessitate two separate contracts that neither of them is related to or based on the other".3
■  The third control, that prohibits using combined contracts as an excuse for dealing in Riba, is based on the directives of the Prophet (Peace be upon Him) which forbid combining lending with selling." In this regard, the Fuqaha unanimously agree that when the two parties stipulate in the loan contract that the borrower should reward the lender by offering him free accommodation, or grant him a present, or the borrower should make excessive repayment in terms of quantity or quality, the contract becomes null and void. In other words, any loan arrangement that comprises a prior condition on a benefit to be rendered to the lender by the borrower is considered Riba.s
• The fourth control, which indicates that the contracts to be combined should not be contradicting with each other in terms of purpose or Sha• ri'ah rulings, stems from the fact that contracts, as indicted by AI-Qarafi, are devices for using appropriate means to achieve specific objectives. Ob• viously, the same contracting requirement  cannot always fit at the same time two contradicting positions. Therefore, contracts that contradict each other in their rulings and effects cannot be combined together in the same transaction.
■    The Shari'ah concessions sanctioned to subsidiary and implicit contracts are based on several statements in "Al-Qawa'id Al-Fiqhiyyah",  including the following:
- What can be forgiven in a subsidiary contract cannot be forgiven in
other contracts

(13) "Tlam AL-Muwaqf'in" [3: 238]; and "Ighathat AL-Lahfan" [2:  103].
(14) Related by Abu Dawud, AI-Tirmidhi, AI-Nasa'i, Ibn Majah, Ahmad, AI-Shafi'i and
Malik. [See footnote No. (3) in Shari'ah Standard No. (19): Loan (Qard)].
(15) "AL-Mughnr"  [6:  436]; "Al-Sharh AL-Kabir 'Ala Al-Muqni" [12:  432]; "AI-Zakhirah" [5: 289]; "AL-kafi" by Ibn Qudamah [2: 93]; "AL-Mubdi" [4:  209]; and  "Majmu' AL• Fatawa" by Ibn Taymiyyah [29: 334].
(16) "AL-Furuq" [3:  142].
(17) Article (54) of "Majallat Al-Ahkam Al-Fiqhiyyah'; and "AI-Ashbah Wa Al-Naza 'ir, (P
120).



663





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (25): Combination of Contracts

- What can be forgiven in implicit contracts cannot be forgiven in in•
dependent  contracts.(9
-- Concessions that can be sanctioned to implicit provisions cannot be sanctioned to ordinary provisions.0
- Provisions in ordinary  contracts  entail more validity requirements
than provisions in implicit and subsidiary contract.@0
- Implicit contracts are relieved ofwhat independent contracts cannot be relieved of.@
- Provisions that hold true in implicit contracts may not hold true in ordinary contracts.(
■  Shortcomings like Gharar, which affect financial transactions such as sale contracts and the like, may be forgiven when the contract subject matter or the contract itself is subsidiary. The Prophet (peace be upon him) said: "When somebody purchases a palm tree,  that has not yet been pollinated, the fruits of the tree should belong to the seller unless the buyer stipulates in the contract that he should be entitled  to the fruits.  This Hadith in• dicates that the reason for ignoring the gharar involved in the act of the buyer who stipulates in the contract that the anticipated fruits ofthe palm tree should belong to him, is the fact that getting the fruits is an implicit aspect ofthe contract. As is the case with gharar, excessive Jahalah is also forgivable in subsidiary and implicit contracts.
■  Ignoring sale-based Riha and non-fulfillment of the Shari'ah requirements of currency exchange in subsidiary contracts is based on the Hadith of the Prophet (peace be upon Him) which states: "When somebody buys a slave who has money,  the slave's  money should go to the seller, unless  the  buyer

(18) "Fatawa AL-Ramlr" [2: 115].
(19) "Bada 'r' AL-Fawa'id" by Ibn Al-Qayyim  [4: 27]. (20) "Bada 'T AL-Sana 'ir" [5: 58].
(21) "Al-Manthur Fi AL-Qawa'id" by Al-Zarkashi [3: 378]. (22) "Radd AL-Muhtar" [4:  170].
(23) "Sahih Al-Bukhari" with  "Fath AI-Barr"  [5:  49]; "Sahih Muslim" with  AI-Nawawi
elaborations  [10:  191];  "Sunan Abu Dawud" [2:  240]; "Sunan Al-Nasa'i"  [2:  260]; "Sunan Ibn Majah" [2: 745]; "Muwatta' AL-Imam Malik" [2: 617]; "Musnad AI-Imam Ahmad" [2: 6, 9, 54, 63, 78, 102 and 150]; and "Aridat Al-Ahwazt" [5: 253].



664





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (25): Combination of Contracts

stipulates in the contract that he should get the money.The justification for this is that the buyer may have taken into consideration  (at the time of making his offer) the amount  of money the slave could have, be it big or small, and explicitly determined  a portion  of the price for it, though he did not declare such portion  independently. Hence, it becomes clear from this Hadith that  it is permissible to buy a slave along with his money without observing the Shari'ah  requirements  of currency  exchange,  and regardless of whether the amount of money that the slave has is big or small, known or unknown.09
• Permissibility of Bay' al-Kali' Bil-Kali' (selling a debt for another  debt) in
subsidiary  and implicit contracts although it is prohibited  in original and independent contracts, is based on the previous Hadith  about purchasing a slave along with the money he has. In this respect, Imam Malik indicated in "AL-Muwatta" the permissibility  of selling a slave and providing  in the contract  for the status of the money he owns, even if that money is a debt owed to the slave by a third party and the slave is himself sold on deferred payment.  That  is to say, Malik seems to have based his opinion  on the apparent  and general meaning  of the  Hadith  and the  ruling  practice  in Al-Madinah.9
• Permissibility of relieving, upon need or probable  interest, subsidiary  and implicit  contracts from  some  of the  bases  and  conditions  of contracts' validity,  can  be  derived  from  a statement  by Al-Sayuti  in  "Al-Ashbah Wa Al-Naza'ir".  In that  statement, Al-Sayuti  indicates  permissibility of
abandoning offer and  acceptance (the form) in case of implicit  sale, or accepting deferred,  instead of spot, delivery/payment in such sales. Such rulings  in fact come  as further ramifications of the  Fiqh principle  that "Subsidiary  contracts  can be relieved from what  other  contracts  cannot be relieved from

(24)  "Sahih Al-Bukhari" with "Fath AL-Bari" [5: 49], "Sahih Muslim" [3: 1173]; "Sunan Abu
Dawud" [2: 240]; "Sunan AI-Nasa '+" [7: 261]; "Sunan Ibn Majah" [2: 746]; "Muwatta'
AI-Imam Malik" [2: 611]; "Musnad AI-Imam Ahmad" [2: 9 and 78]; and  "Aridat Al•
Ahwazr" [5: 252].
(25)  "AI-Qabas" by Ibn AI-'Arabi [2: 805]; "Al-Mughni" by Ibn Qudamah  [6: 96]; and "AL• Zurqani 'Ala Al-Muwtta"" [3: 253].
(26)  "AI-Zurqani 'Ala Al-Muwtta"" [3: 253].
(27)  "AI-Ashbah Wa Al-Naza 'ir" by Al-Sayuti (pp. 120 and 377).



665





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (25): Combination of Contracts

■  Muwata' ah for combining  contracts  is considered  as an enforceable condition that precedes the signing of the contract, because Muwata'ah, traditionally as well as in fiqh terminology, is an agreement between the two parties to sign contracts and honor pledges in the future. Therefore Ibn Taymiyyah said, "When the two parties agree beforehand to do specific things, and then sign a general contract, the contract should honor that prior agreement?8
■  A condition that precedes the contract  should be regarded as binding and enforceable as a one that comes in the text of the contract, because traditionally there is no difference between the conditions stated in the contract and those agreed upon beforehand, even if such prior conditions are not mentioned at the time of signing the contract. This is only natural since these conditions  form the bases of the contract, which the two parties have agreed to observe. This viewpoint is supported by a number of traditionally accepted norms such as:
- A condition, which the two parties agree to observe, resembles a one
explicitly mentioned in the contract.
- Traditionally acceptable conditions resemble explicitly stated condi•
tions.
- Intentions in contracts deserve observation.
Moreover,  enforceability of prior conditions was the ruling practice in
Al-Madinah andthepredominantopinion in Al-ImamAhmad's School.3
■  Prohibition ofMuwata'ah for devising Riha tricks is because Muwata'ah in this case is a means used for practicing Riha. Consequently, since the end objective (which is Riha) is prohibited, the means used for achieving it must also be prohibited.  As indicated  in AI-Qawa'id Al-Fiqhiyyah", "means are discarded on discarding of objectives0

(28)  "Nazariyyat Al-'Aqd by Ibn Taymiyyah  (p. 204).
(29)  "Tlam AL-Muwaqqi'in" [3: 105, 145, 212 and 241]; "KashshafAl-Qina" [5:98]; "Bayan AL-Dalil 'Ala Butlan Al-Tahlil" (P.  533);  "Majmu' AL-Fatawa" by  Ibn  Taymiyyah [29:  336]; "Al-Fatawa AL-Kubra" by Ibn Taymiyyah  [4:  108];  "AL-Madkhal Al-Fiqhi Al-'Aam" by AI-Zarqa   [1: 487]; and Al-'Uqud  Wa Al-Shurut Wa AL-Khiyarat" by Ahmad  Ibrahim (P. 711).
(30)  "AL-Furuq" by AI Qarafi  [2:  33]; and  "AI-Qawa'id AL-Kubra" by AI-'Izz Ibn Abdul• Salam [1:  161  and  168].



666





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (25): Combination of Contracts

■  Prohibition  of Muwata'ah as an excuse for Riba, originates from the application  of the  principle  of Sadd  al-Zara 'r.  This  principle  aims to prohibit  permissible  practices that  could be used  as a means  for accomplishing Sharf'ah-banned objectives.63
■  However,  application  of the  principle  of Sadd  al-Zara'i should  be based on two requirements as indicated by the Maliki Fuqaha. The first requirement is that resort to the Zariah (excuse) should be very frequent and excessive in view ofnormal practice, and the second requirement is the presence of a strong accusation that rules out the possibility of any good intention behind using the excuse. Application of the principle of Sadd al-Zara 'i' should also observe the non-existence of any need or lawful interest for using the Zariah, as has been emphasized by several fiqh principles such as:
- Prohibition for the sake ofblocking the way to excuses is less force•
ful than prohibition per se.3
-- Practices that originate from the need for devising acceptable Shari'ah exits deserve more Shari'ah concessions than other practices.
- Acts that are prohibited for the sake of blocking the way to excuses become permissible in case of need or desire to achieve a lawful in• terest.,(359
■  Permissibility of Muwata 'ah for devising acceptable Shari'ah exits can be derived from the statements of several Fuqaha who indicate that using Shari'ah accepted means to achieve permissible objectives is permissible. According to those Fuqaha practicing acceptable Shari'ah exits and helping others to devise them is a permissible and reward-worthy practice as long as it abides by the directives of Allah, Exalted be He, leads to avoidance of sins, and facilitates achievement oflawful interests.(36)

(31)  "Sharh Tanqih Al-Fusul" (P. 449); "AL-Furuq" by AI-Qarafi [2: 32] and "AL-Qabas" [2: 876]. (32)  "AL-Muwafaqat"  [4:  198];  "AL-Ma'unah"  by  AI-Qadi  Abdul-Wahhab  [2:  996];  and
"Iqd Al-Jawahir AI-Thaminah" [2: 441]. (33)  "Tlam AL-Muwaqqi'in" [2: 140].
(34)  "AI-Ashbah Wa Al-Naza 'ir" by Al-Sayuti  (P 158).
(35)  "Zad AL-Maad" [4:  78]; "Tafsir Ayat Ashkalat" by Ibn Taymiyyah   [2: 682]; "Majmw' Al• Fatawa" by Ibn Taimaih [23: 214-215], [32: 228-229]; and "Tlam Al-Muwaqqt'in" [2: 142].
(36)  "Ighathat Al-Lahfan" [1: 339, 383 and 385]  and  [2: 86].



667





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (25): Combination of Contracts

■  Prohibition  of Muwata 'ah for combining  contracts  that  contradict  each other in rulings and objectives is because Muwata' ah in this case is used as a means of doing an unacceptable act. According to Shari'ah, means always follow ends with regard to permissibility  and prohibition. It has been indicated in "Al-Qawa'id Al-Fiqhiyyah" that: "Disregarding the ends leads to disregard of the means8
■  Recognition  of Muwata'ah when it precedes contemporary transactions, that  comprise a set of successive and inseparable  contracts  forming up a single transaction, is the present day commercial and banking tradition that considers Muwata' ah in this case as binding to the two parties. In fact, Muwata 'ah in this sense is part of a whole system that tends to completely collapse when any of its individual  components  looses balance. Violating Muwata' ah in this case will jeopardize  the fulfillment of the objectives of the contracting  parties, and may cause them serious injuries.
■  The pledges that  relate to an agreement  are binding  to the two parties since,  according to its nature  and Fiqh status,  and as perceived by most of the Fuqaha, such pledges are similar to the conditions stipulated in the agreement.  Enforceability of such pledges also stems from  the  fact that they constitute the basis for the transaction. It is well known that Shari'ah• accepted conditions stipulated in a contract are binding from both the fiqhi as well as the legal viewpoints. Moreover, in present day commercial and banking traditions, such pledges are also considered as binding. Otherwise, it will not be possible for the two parties to form up a definite perception about the purpose  and objectives of the contract, and hence they will not be able to sign it.












(37)  "A1-Muafaqat" [2: 212].
(38)  "AL-Qawa'id" by AI-Muqri  [1: 329].



668





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (25): Combination of Contracts





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Zara'i'

Zara'i' are the apparently  permissible  practices  used as a means  of doing a prohibited  act. Therefore, Sadd al-Zara'i means prohibition  of permissible practices that can be used for committing  Shari'ah-restricted acts. However, prohibition in this sense is subject to two restrictions. The first is the existence of a clear intention  of the person in question to use the permissible practice for the sake of accomplishing  Sharf'ah-banned objectives, and the second is that resorting to prohibition  should be only after wide spread of such misconduct in the society.

Subsidiaries

Subsidiary contracts or objectives in financial transactions refer to the consequent contracts or objectives that follow the original ones. The subsid• iary status ofthese contracts or objectives is usually determined according to tradition, practice and the experience of those who are in the field.

Transaction

It is a binding contractual relationship that carries no optional choices.

'Inah

It is a sale whereby one party, for instance,  sells the commodity to the other for one hundred dollars, on deferred payment basis, and repurchases it from the other for eighty dollars payable on spot. In fact, the sale transaction here is nothing but a mere trick for practicing usurious lending, and the commodity  is used for no purpose  other than  facilitating the usurious transaction.  The deal in this case has nothing  to do with the purposes and objectives of sale, nor does it contain any element of them. In other words 'Inah takes place when one party buys a commodity from the other



669





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (25): Combination of Contracts

on deferred payment basis and before making payment  sells back the same commodity to the other for a less amount of money payable on spot.

Reverse 'Inah

It takes place when one party sells the commodity  to the other party for a spot price, and the seller repurchases the same commodity from the buyer or from his agent for a higher deferred price.
Bay' al-Raja' (Bay' al-Wafa')

It is a sale whereby  the seller keeps the intention to buy back his sold commodity.  One of the most popular forms of this type of sale is when one party, who wants to obtain an interest-bearing loan, agrees to sell an income-earning asset to the lender. The lender  will thus become  entitled to the  income  of the  asset as long  as it remains  in his  ownership.  The buyer  then  undertakes to  return the  sold  asset to  the  seller whenever the seller pays back the same price to him. In this manner, the borrower (artificial buyer)  succeeds to get the loan amount against payment of the agreed upon  interest.

Shari'ah-Banned Tricks

It refers to those permissible contractual arrangements and other practices, which may be used to achieve prohibited goals like permitting what Shari'ah has prohibited, like escaping duties, deceiving people and performing  other Shari'ah-banned practices.

Shari'ah Exit (Shari'ah-Acceptable Trick)

A Sharf'ah exit is an act that is performed  for the sake of avoiding com• mitment  of sins, or achieving  a permissible  objective, or refraining  from prohibited  acts, or realizing a Shari'ah-acceptable interest.

Separation of the Transaction

Separation of a transaction means dividing the object of the same contract, into portions. To Fuqaha, it means a situation in which the provisions of the contract do not cover all the components of its object, or they may cover all of them first, and then shrink down to cover only some of them later on. Thus, either the single transaction is broken down into a number ofportions, or only



670





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (25): Combination of Contracts

some parts of it are separated in this manner. When separation takes place in this manner in a single transaction between a single buyer and a single seller and for a single price, the buyer should have the option to conclude the deal or not.



















































671

























Shari'ah Standard No. (26)




Islamic Insurance












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                                        677
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        678

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               678
2.  Definition oflslamic Insurance in Contrastwith Conventional Insurance.       678
3. Status  of Islamic Insurance  According to Fiqh (Islamic Jurispru- dence)........................................................................................................       678
4.  Contractual Relationships in Islamic Insurance...................................       679
5. Principles and Shari'ah Bases oflslamic Insurance..............................       680
6. Types of Islamic Insurance......................................................................       681
7. Participation in Islamic Insurance                                                            682
8. Commitments  of the Participant in Islamic Insurance                             682
9. Conditions in Islamic Insurance Policies..............................................        683
10. Commitments and Jurisdictions ofthe Joint Stock Company                  683

11. Indemnity...................................................................................................        685
12. Insurance Surplus......................................................................................       685
13. Expiry of Insurance Policy.......................................................................       686
14. Date of Issuance of the Standard.............................................................       686
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        687

Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        688
Appendix  (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard.....................................       690
Appendix  (c):  Definitions..............................................................................       698










675








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


The purpose ofthis standard is to present the Shari'ah rules that govern Islamic Insurance, as well as the characteristics, basic aspects, principles and types of Islamic Insurance. The standard also aims to indicate the controls that Islamic financial Institutions (Institution/Institutions)should observe in this connection.






























(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



677





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers Islamic Insurance in terms ofits definition, Sharf'ah status, characteristics, principles, basic elements, types, and how it differs from Conventional Insurance.  The Standard also sets out the controls to be observed by the Islamic financial Institutions  offering products based on Islamic insurance. However, it does not cover social insurance schemes arranged by the state.

2. Definition oflslamic Insurance in Contrast with Conventional Insur•
ance

Islamic Insurance is a process of agreement among a group ofpersons to handle the injuries resulting from specific risks to which all of them are vulnerable. A process, thus initiated, involves payment of contributions as donations, and leads to the establishment of an insurance fund that enjoys the status of a legal entity and has independent financial liability. The resources of this fund are used to indemnify any participant  who encounters injury, subject to a specific set of rules and a given process of documentation. The fund is managed by either a selected group of policyholders, or a joint  stock company  that  manages the insurance operations and invests the assets ofthe fund, against a specific fee.

As for Conventional Insurance, it is a Mu'awadah (mutual compensation) contract that seeks to make profit out of the insurance operation itself, and, hence, is subject to Shari'ah rulings on financial dealings that involve Gharar (uncertainty).  Consequently, conventional insurance is banned by Sharf'ah.

3. Status oflslamic Insurance According to Fiqh (Islamic Jurisprudence)

Islamic insurance is based on the commitment  of the participants  to make donations  for the sake of their  own interest. The participants,



678





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

therefore, protect their group by payment ofcontributions that constitute the resources of the insurance fund, and assign the management of that fund to a committee of policyholders, or to a joint stock company that possesses the license of practicing insurance business. In the latter case, the company assumes this job on the basis of a remunerated  Wakalah (Agency) contract. In addition to managing the insurance operations, the  committee  of policyholders  or  the  company  also  assumes  the responsibility of investing the assets of the fund through Mudarabah or investment agency.

3/1  The managing company is entitled to its own capital and returns on capital, the agency fee, and its specific share of the profits earned by investing the insurance  assets through  Mudarabah  or investment agency. The company also bears all the expenses of its operations including those relating to its tasks for investing the insurance assets.

3/2 The policyholders fund is entitled to the contributions and the returns thereon, the provisions and reserves relating to insurance business, and the insurance surplus. The fund bears all direct expenses pertaining to management of insurance operations.

4. Contractual Relationships  in Islamic Insurance

There are three contractual relationships in Islamic insurance, including:

4/1  The Musharakah (partnership) among the participants, which leads to the establishment ofa company that has articles ofassociation and all other documents. The relationship between the participants may be confined to a Musharakah contract  if a company manages the fund.  [see Shari'ah  Standard No.  (12), on Sharikah  (Musharakah) and Modern Corporations]

4/2 The relationship between the company and the policyholders' fund which  is a Wakalah  relationship  in regard  to management,  and a Mudarabah  or investment  agency relationship  in regard to the investment of the fund's assets.

4/3 The relationship  between the policy holders and the fund which takes the form of donation  commitment at the stage of making



679





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

contributions, and indemnification commitment at the stage ofpro• viding compensation  for injury as per regulations and underlying constituent documents.

5. Principles and Shari'ah Bases oflslamic Insurance

Islamic insurance  is based  on the  following principles  and rules  of Sharf'ah, which shall be explicitly mentioned in the articles ofassociation or the rules or the documents of the corporation:

5/1  Donation commitment, as it should be stipulated that the participant donates his contribution  and the returns thereon to the insurance account for payment of indemnity, and may undertake to bear any deficit that may occur, as per regulations.

5/2 The company that arranges the insurance deal should maintain two separate accounts: one for its own rights and liabilities, and the other for the rights and liabilities of the policyholders.

5/3 The company should assume the role of the agent in managing the insurance account, and the role ofthe Mudarib or agent in investing the insurance assets.

5/4 The insurance account is entitled to the insurance assets and their returns  on investment,  and should bear the liabilities relating to these assets.

5/5 The adopted rules may comprise disposal of the surplus in a way that serves the cause of common interest ofthe participants, such as accumulation of reserves, reduction of the contribution, charitable donations  and partial/full  distribution  of the surplus among the participants. The managing company is not entitled to any share of the surplus.

5/6 When the company is liquidated,  all provisions and accumulated reserves pertaining to insurance should be spent on charitable pur• poses.

5/7 Preference should be given to policyholders to participate in manage• ment of the insurance operations through appropriate legal arrange• ments that enable them to exercise their control rights and protect



680





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

their interest. Such arrangements  could include, among others, repre•
sentation of policyholders in the Board of Directors.

5/8 Company shall adhere to the rules and principles of Islamic Sharf'ah in  all its activities  and  investments,  especially  in  refraining  from provision  of insurance  coverage for Shari'ah-banned items, activities or purposes.

5/9 A Sharf'ah Supervisory Board  shall be formulated for issuance  of Fatawa  (plural:  Fatwa,  i. e.  juristic opinion)   that  are binding to the  company,  and  establishment of an  internal   unit  for  Shari'ah monitoring and auditing.
6. Types of Islamic Insurance

6/1  Property  Insurance: which  entails indemnification  for actual injury, and comprises insurance against fire, car accidents, airplane accidents, liability, breach of trust, etc. [See Shari'ah Standard No. (5) on Guarantees - item 6/4]

6/2  Person Insurance: which includes insurance against the risk of disability and death, and is sometimes known  as Takaful (mutual support).  It corresponds to conventional life insurance.

6/2/1  Insurance  against the risk of disability or death takes place as follows:

6/2/1/1 Submission  of a request  for participation indicating all personal  affairs  and  characteristics,  that  need  to be known  for offering the insurance coverage to the insured, along with the particulars ofthe entitlements and obligations  of the insured.

6/2/1/2 Specification of the contribution amount.

6/2/1/3 Specification of the benefits payable to the beneficiary as per agreement.
6/2/1/4In case of death,  the  Takaful entitlements  should  be distributed among  the  deserving  persons, parties  or purposes  as indicated  in the documents,  and accord-



681





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

ing to the regulatory rules issued by the Sharf'ah Su• pervisory Board. In case the deceased was entitled to some investment balances, then the same should be distributed among the inheritors according to the Is• lamic rules of inheritance.

6/2/1/5 In case of insurance against death, it should be stip• ulated in the insurance policy that the insured  (the beneficiary)  or his inheritor  should not be entitled to any compensation  when  the  death  is caused by a murder wherein the said beneficiary or inheritor is involved.

7. Participation in Islamic Insurance

7/1  Non-Muslims may participate with Muslims in the various types of
Islamic insurance.

7/2 The  contribution  may be determined  according to the  actuarial principles based on statistical techniques. In this regard, due con• sideration should be given to whether the risk involved is fixed or variable, and to the contribution/risk tradeoffbesides determination of the type and period of the risk coverage, and specification of the insurance amount.

7/3 The risk that constitutes the subject matter of insurance should be one that could probably occur. It should not be something that relates to the absolute will of the participant, and should not encounter any Shari'ah prohibition.

8. Commitments  of the Participant in Islamic Insurance

The participant (insurance seeker) should observe the following commit•
ments:

8/1  Submission ofthe required information about the risks to be insured against, and informing the company of any new circumstances that may increase these risks after concluding the contract. If it is proved that the participant  had committed fraud or deceit,  or submitted false information,  he is then  subject to partial or full deprivation



682





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

from  indemnity. In case of unintentional misrepresentation by the participant, the indemnity shall become proportionate to the accurate information he presented.
8/2  Payment of contribution on time as per agreement. Ifthe participant refrains  from  or delays payment of his contribution,  the  company has the right to terminate the contract  or pursue  legal enforcement of payment.

8/3  Informing the company, in its capacity as an agent of the policyholders' fund,  of occurrence of the risk insured. Notification should be made during the period stipulated in the insurance policy, or within reasonable  time  if such period  is not provided  for in the policy.  If the participant fails to make such notification, the company  has the right to claim indemnity from him for the actual loss incurred by the insurance  account due to such breach of commitment.

9. Conditions in Islamic Insurance Policies

9/1  There is no Shari'ah restriction on providing for special conditions in the insurance policy. Special conditions may relate to periods of insur• ance, denial of indemnity in specific cases as when the participant fails to notify the company about occurrence of risk on time,  or charging the participant  with a specific portion  of the indemnity.  A condition thus stipulated in the insurance policy remains binding  as long as it does not contradict with the rules of Shari'ah or the prerequisites of the contract.

9/2 It is permissible to stipulate in the insurance policy special cases that lead to deprivation from indemnity provided that justice, preservation of rights, and avoidance of abusive conditions are well observed.

10. Commitments and Jurisdictions of the Joint Stock Company

10/1  The  Company  shall  assume  the  various  tasks  of managing  the insurance  operations  including; preparation  of insurance policies, collection of contributions, payment  of indemnities,  and all other technical tasks. The Company performs such tasks against a specific fee, which should be stated in the agreement in order to obtain the participant's  approval thereon by signing the contract.



683





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

10/2 The Company is entrusted  with the duty of achieving common interest  while  undertaking  the  management   of the  insurance operations. However, it should not guarantee the insurance assets except in case of misconduct, negligence or breach of contractual obligations.

10/3  The Company shall bear its pre-operating expenses as well as all other expenses that relate to conducting  its own business or the investment of its own funds.

10/4 The statutory reserve ofthe Joint Stock Company is deducted from its share capital and becomes part of its shareholders equity, a case that  also holds true  for all other capital-related deductions. No deduction shall be made from the policyholders fund or profits for the benefit ofthe shareholders of the Joint Stock Company.

10/5  For the sake ofserving the policyholders' interest, it is permissible to deduct part of their funds or profits to be used as reserves or allocations pertaining  to the insurance  fund. Such deductions, however, should by no means belong to the shareholders  of the Joint Stock Company. The accumulated balance of the insurance account shall be spent on charity purposes in case ofliquidation.

10/6 The Company  claims indemnity from the party who causes the injury, whether  through  breach  of contractual  commitment or any similar misbehavior.  In this case,  the Company  represents the participants  in disposing of all the tasks that relate to the case, such as filing oflawsuits, realization ofthe consequent rights, and depositing the proceeds in the insurance account.

10/7 When  the  Company  invests the  policyholders'  funds  through Mudarabah, it should bear the expenses that are normally borne by the Mudarib  [see Shari'ah Standard No. (13) on Mudarabah]. However, if the Company invests such funds through investment agency, the deal shall be subject to Shari'ah rulings on remunerated agency.



684





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

10/8  When the insurance assets along with indemnities received from re• insurance companies fall short ofcovering indemnity commitments, the Company may cover the deficit from project financing or Qard Hasan (interest-free  or benevolent loan) debited to the  account of the insurance fund. In this regard, the deficits resulting from commitments ofthe current year may be covered from the surpluses of the succeeding years. The Company may also claim settlement of the deficit from policyholders if they undertake to do so in the insurance policy.

10/9 The insurance  account shall bear all the expenses and fees that relate to insurance activities.

10/10 There is no Shari'ah restriction on reconciling between the Company and the party who causes the injury, if such reconciliation is in the interest of the participants, and conforms to the relevant Shari'ah rulings.

11. Indemnity

11/1  The participant shall receive either the loss, he incurred because of the injury, or the insurance amount; whichever is less, and as per regulations.

11/2 The participant  should not receive both the indemnity  and the compensation  from other parties for injury caused to him.

11/3 In Property Insurance, indemnity should be confined to what has been provided for in the regulations, and may comprise subsidiary losses that can be appropriately estimated according to the actual injury.

12. Insurance Surplus

12/1  The insurance surplus is part ofthe assets ofthe insurance account and should be disposed of according to what has been stated in item 5/5 of this Standard.

12/2 Distribution ofthe surplus orpart thereofamong the policyholders should be in one ofthe following forms, provided that the selected form is explicitly mentioned  in the regulations:



685





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

12/2/1 Distribution   of  the  surplus  among  the  policyholders  in proportion to their respective contributions, and regardless of whether the policyholder has received indemnity during the financial period or not.

12/2/2 Distribution of the  surplus  among  the  policyholders  who have not received indemnity during the financial period.

12/2/3 Distribution    of  the   surplus   among   policyholders   after deducting the amounts of indemnity they receive during the same financial period.

12/2/4 Distribution   through  any  other  method  approved  by the
Sharf'ah Supervisory Board.

13. Expiry of Insurance Policy

The insurance policy expires in any of the following cases:

13/1  At the end of the period agreed upon in the insurance policy.  In case of property insurance, it is permissible to stipulate that the contract is automatically renewable unless the participant informs the company, within a specific period before expiry ofthe contract, ofhis desire to cease contract's renewal.

13/2 Termination ofthe policy by the company or the participant, if the policy provides for the right of termination to each of the parties to contract.

13/3  Complete  damage  of the insured  property  (in case of property insurance), without  nullifying the entitlement  of the participant to the indemnity, subject to the contract's conditions.

13/4 Death of the insured person  in case of persons'  (life) insurance, without  nullifying the entitlement of the beneficiary  to the in• surance benefits, subject to the contract's conditions.

14. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 23 Rabi' I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 2
May2005A.D.



686





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah standard on Islamic Insurance was adopted by the Shari'ah
Board in its meeting No.  (16) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah on
7-12 Jumada I, 1427 A.H., corresponding to 3-9 June 2006 A.D.













































687





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board decided in its meeting No. (8) held on 28 Safar - 4
Rabi' I, 1423 A.H., corresponding to 11-16 May 2002 A.D., in Makkah Al• Mukarramah to issue a Sharf'ah Standard on Islamic Insurance.

On 12 Jumada I, 1424 A.H., 12 July 2003 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a draft standard on Islamic Insurance.

In its meeting No. (10) held on 23-24 Jumada II, 1424 A.H., corresponding to 23-24 July 2003 A.D., in Amman, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, the Shari'ah Standards Committee  (1) discussed the Shari'ah study and advised the consultant to incorporate the necessary changes, in the light of the discussions and observations of its members.

The Shari'ah Standards Committee (1) once again discussed the draft of the Standard in its meeting No. (11) held on 25-26 Safar 1425 A.H., corre• sponding to 15-6 April 2004 A.D., in the Kingdom of Bahrain and incor• porated further changes in it. The committee also requested the consultant to review the document  on the light of the discussions and incorporate necessary changes.

A third round of discussions on and amendments  in the draft of the Standard also took place in meeting No. (12)  of the Shari'ah Standards Committee (1) held on 28 Rabi' II, 1425 A.H., corresponding to 16 June
2004 A.D. in Dubai, United Arab Emirates.

The revised version of the Standard was then submitted to the Shari'ah
Board in its meeting No.  (13) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah  on 26
Sha'ban - 1  Ramadan  1425  A.H.,  corresponding to 10-15  October 2004
A.D. and further changes were incorporated in the document.



688





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

In its meeting No.  (14) held in Dubai, United Arab Emirates on 21-24
Rabi' I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 30 April-2 May 2005 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the draft of the Standard and decided, in the light of the discussions and comments of the members, to transfer it to the Sharf'ah Standards Committee (1) for thorough study.

The Shari'ah Standards Committee (1) studied the draft ofthe Standard in its meeting No. (17) held in Kingdom of Bahrain on 4-5Sha'ban 1426 A.H., corresponding to 8-9 September 2005 A.D.

The revised draft of the Standard was again submitted to the Sharf'ah
Board in its meeting No. (15) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, on 22-26
Sha'ban 1426 A.H., corresponding  to 26-30 September 2005 A.D. The Board decided to send the document to concerned experts for review and comments before discussing it in a public hearing.

AAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 1   Safar
1427 A.H., corresponding to 1  March 2006 A.D. More than 30 participants representing central banks, Institutions, accounting firms, Shari'ah scholars, academics and other interested parties attended the session. Several comments and observations were posed, to which the members ofthe Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) duly responded.

In its meeting held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 1  Safar 1427 A.H., corresponding  to 1  March 2006 A.D., the Drafting Committee discussed the comments and observations made in the public hearing and made the changes that it deemed necessary.

In its meeting No.  (16) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah on 7-12
Jumada I,  1427 A.H., corresponding to 3-9 June 2006 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the amendments proposed by the Drafting Committee, incorporated  some changes in the document and approved the Standard (unanimously for some clauses and with the majority for others), as indicated in the minutes ofthe Board's meetings.








689





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


■  Commercial Insurance is prohibited because it involves Gharar (uncer• tainty). In this regard Muslim, Ashab Al-Sunan (compilers of the books of Sunan) and others quoted Abu Hurayrah as having said:  "The Prophet peace be upon him prohibited sales which involve Gharar"•
■  The Fuqaha define Gharar in several ways, which -in brief- indicate that it is a process that has unknown/unrevealed consequences and outco• mes.63
Some contemporary scholars believe that Gharar is similar to betting and gambling."
Resolutions of Fiqh forums  on insurance include the resolution of the
Islamic Fiqh Academy in its first session held  in  1398 A.H., which endorsed a preceding resolution on the subject issued by the Council of Eminent  Shari'ah Scholars of the Kingdom  of Saudi Arabia in its session No. (10) held in Riyadh on 4 April 1397 A.H. A third resolution on the subject was issued by the International  Islamic Fiqh Academy - Resolution No. 9 (9/2).
■  Permissibility of cooperative/mutual/social insurance stems from the fact that it is based on cooperation and donation, rather than on Mu'awadah (exchange contract). It is well known among the Fuqaha (Maliki School)

(2) "Sahih Muslim",  Kitab: AL-Buyu' [3: 1153]; "Sunan Abu  Dawud" [2: 228] (H: 3367); "Sunan  Al  Nasa'r"  [2:  217];  "Sunan  Ibn  Majah  [2:  739];  "Sunan  Al-Tirmidht" [3:  532];  "Sunan  Al-Darimi" [2:  167];  "Al-Muwatta"" [2: 664];  "Musnad Al-Imam Ahmad" [1: 203] and [2: 367 and 439]; "Sunan Al-Bayhaqi" [5: 226] and "Musannaf Ibn Abu  Shaybah" [8:  194], Section  (2).
(3) See: "Sharh AI-'Inayah Ma'a Fath Al-Qadir" [5: 192]; "Tabyin Al-Haqa 'iq" [4: 46]; "Al-Taj
Wa AL-Iklil"  [4:  362]; "Fath AI-'Aziz Bi-Hamish Al-Majmu"  [8:  127];  "Matalib  U AL•
Nuha" [3: 25]; "AI-Qawa'id AL-Nuraniyya(P.  116); "Nazariyyat AI-'Aqd"  (P. 224).  See: "AL-Gharar  Wa Atharahu  Fi AI-'Uqud" by AI-Siddiq Al-Amin Al-Darir (published  by Saleh Kamil Center for University Thesis), (P. 54).
(4) See: Husayn Hamid,  "AI-Gharar" (P. 72).



690





Shari'ah Standard No. (26): Islamic Insurance

that Gharar has no impact on donation contracts. This viewpoint is well supported by a number  of Quranic verses and sayings of the Prophet (peace be upon him) which instruct Muslims to promote cooperation.
■  Consequently,  several resolutions  were issued by Fiqh forums  regar• ding permissibility of cooperative insurance.  Such resolutions include, the resolution of the Islamic Research Academy of Al-Azhar Al-Sharif, the resolution of the Islamic Fiqh Academy of the World Muslim League referred to earlier, and the resolution of the International  Islamic Fiqh Academy, which states that:  'The  contract that respects the origins of Islamic dealings is the cooperative insurance Contract which is based on donation and cooperation ...". The fact that cooperative insurance is permissible, also does not seem to have encountered any dispute among contemporary Muslim Fuqaha.6°
■  Permissibility of cooperative insurance and non-permissibility of com•
mercial insurance is in fact due to the following differences:

a) The conventional insurance contract is a financial Mu'awadah (exchange contract) that aims at making profit out of the insurance operations. Therefore, its permissibility should be judged in the light of the Shari'ah rulings on financial transactions. Consequently, such rulings prohibit the conventional insurance contract, which involves Gharar.

b) In the Islamic insurance contract, the company assumes the role ofthe agent ofthe insurance account, whereas in the commercial insurance contract the company is an original party that signs the contract in its own name.

c) The company in commercial insurance owns the premiums against its commitment  to pay the insurance  amount; whereas in Islamic insurance, it is the insurance account rather than the company that owns the contributions.

d) In Islamic insurance the residual premiums and the returns on them, that  remain  after deduction  of expenses and indemnity  amounts,

(5) Fatawa of the Sharf'ah Advisory Board of Al Rajhi   Banking & Investment Company, Fatwa No. (40).



691





Shari'ah Standard No. (26): Islamic Insurance

become the property  of the policyholders  account,  and constitute a surplus, which can be distributed  among the policyholders. This cannot  be imagined in commercial insurance  where the company owns and receives the premiums as soon as it signs the contract. In commercial insurance, the premiums  constitute part of the revenue and profits of the company.

e) In Islamic insurance, the returns on investment ofthe premium assets belong to the policyholders account, after deduction of the Mudarib share for the company, whereas such returns belong to the company in commercial insurance.

f)  Islamic insurance aims at achieving cooperation among the members of the society, rather than generating profits from the insurance operations, whereas commercial insurance is profit-oriented.

g) The company in Islamic insurance earns profits through investment of its own funds and its share in Mudarabah, as it assumes the role of the Mudarib and the insurance account assumes the role of the Rab al-Mal (owner ofthe capital).

h) In Islamic insurance, the insurer and the participant  are in fact the same person although they differ in recognition, whereas the insurer and the participant are totally different in commercial insurance.

i)  The company in Islamic insurance adheres to the rules of Islamic Sharf'ah and the Fatawa of its Sharf'ah Supervisory Board, while in commercial insurance there are no such commitments.

j)  In Islamic insurance, the allocations from the insurance account, which remain there until the time ofliquidation of the company, are spent on charity purposes, and do not go to shareholders, whereas in commercial insurance such amounts go to shareholders.
■  The Shari'ah ruling that the Islamic insurance contract is an act of dona• tion that both parties are bound to honor, is measured by analogy to what is known in Fiqh as Nihd,"or donation pledge. It has been narrated that

(6) AI-Bukhari in  his "Sahih" [15:  128]  commented on Nihd or Nahd where he said
( ....since Muslims did not see any harm in Nihd, in which the members of       =



692





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

Ali and Ibn Mas'ud said: "A gift, if specifically defined, is binding, whether received or not:' It has also been narrated that Abu Baler and Umar indi• cated that a gift does not become binding before receipt.(7) Malik however reconciled the two viewpoints by indicating that Ali, Ibn Mas'ud and the others seem to have focused on the fact that the contract as such is bin• ding, while Abu Baler and Umar seem to have focused on the fact that the receipt of the gift is a prerequisite of finalizing the contract. The lat• ter viewpoint was justified by the desire to leave no room for an excuse that Umar explicitly mentioned."" The obligatory nature of the donation contract can also be derived from the saying of the Prophet (peace be upon him) that:  "A person who withdraws his gift is like a dog that with• holds its vomit"(9
■  The basis of the Sharf'ah ruling that the company should not guarantee
the insurance  assets is that  the company  is an agent, and the Fuqaha unanimously  agree that  an agent should  not  guarantee  the property except against misconduct, negligence or breach of the contract.
■  The justification for stating the nine principles oflslamic insurance in the
articles ofassociation ofthe company is the need to preserve the element of donation  in the contract  and emphasize it as a basic aspect of the company, and hence preserve the cooperative nature and permissibility ofthe insurance operation. Otherwise, the insurance operation becomes a Mu'awadah transaction, and therefore subject to impact of Gharar as mentioned  earlier. In other words, emphasis on the nine principles  is because they constitute  the fundamental  differences between  Islamic insurance  and  commercial  insurance.  Several Fatawa were issued to

=   of the  group  consume  different   amounts   of the  food  to  which  they  have  equally contributed)  and he narrated some sayings of the Prophet  (peace be upon  him) that support  this practice. In "Fath AL-Bart" [5: 129], Ibn Hajar indicated  that Nihd was an ancient practice ofMuslim travelers who used to contribute equally to the stock offood they need during their journey, and leave each of them free to consume the portion of
the food he needs. At the end of the journey, they distri bute the food leftover among themselves, unless they decide to keep it for another  journey. This is quite similar  to the treatment of the surplus  in Islamic Insurance.
(7) See:  "AL-Muwatta"" [2: 468]; and  "Nasb Al-Rayah" [4:  122].
(8) "Bidayat AL-Mujtahid" [2: 534].
(9) "Sahih AL-Bukhari" [5: 190]; and  "Sahih Muslim" (H:  1622].



693





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

demonstrate these  differences  including, Fatwa No.  (12/11)  issued  by the  12 Seminar  on Islamic Economics  of the Al Baraka  Group, Fatwa No.  (42/3)  issued  by the  Shari'ah Supervisory   Board  of the  Al Rajhi Company, Fatwa of the Shari'ah Board of Faisal Islamic Bank and Fatwa of the Islamic insurance Company of Jordan.
■  The general framework ofthe contract and the nature ofits conditions have been set up along the lines of binding  contracts  in Islamic jurisprudence, and the peculiar  characteristics  of the  insurance  contracts  as far  as the insured is concerned.
• The ruling that the insurer and the insured must fulfill their commitments is
based on the Sharf'ah prerequisite ofhonoring contracts. Since the insurance contract is a binding contract, all its conditions should be honored  unless they violate the rules of Islamic Shari'ah. Such reasoning is well supported by various Quranic Verses and sayings of the Prophet (peace be upon him) that explicitly instruct  Muslims to honor  their  contracts  and conditions. In this regard, Allah, the Almighty, says:  {"O You who believe! Fulfill (all) obligations.."}. The Prophet (peace be upon him) also says "Muslims are
at their conditions".3
■  The  company  could  manage  the  insurance  account  against  fee or free of charge because  the relationship  here  is viewed  as agency, which  the Fuqaha unanimously approve, with or without remuneration. The Fatawa in this regard comprise  those of the  12 Seminar  on Islamic Economics of the Al Baraka Group  (Fatwa No.  (12/11), the resolution  of the Islamic Fiqh Academy of the Muslim World League - Makkah  Al-Mukarramah
(Fatwa No. 961), and Fatwa No. (51) of the Council of Eminent  Scholars of Saudi Arabia.
• The basis ofassigning the investment ofthe assets ofthe insurance fund to the company is the Mudarabah contract, which the Fuqaha unanimously declare as permissible. Arrangement of investment in this manner  entails

(10) See:  "Fatawa Al-Ta 'min,  Dallah  Al Baraka  Group,  Dr. Abdul-Sattar  Abu Ghuddah and Dr. Izzul-Din  Khoja (eds.), (pp. 99-108).
(11)  [Al-Ma' idah (The Table):  l].
(12) Related by AI-Bukhari in his "Sahih" [4: 451]; and AI-Tirmidhi with "Tuhfat Al-Ahwazi"
[4: 584]. AI-Tirmidhi deemed it a good, authentic Hadith.



694





Shari'ah Standard No. (26): Islamic Insurance

specification of a profit  share for each party, and  entitlement  of the insurance fund to its respective share. The relevant Fatawa in this regard include the Fatwa of the Sharf'ah Supervisory Board of Faisal Islamic Bank,(  Fatwa No.  (12/11)  of the 12  Seminar on Islamic Economics of the Al Baraka Group and the Shari'ah Standard No. (13): Mudarabah.
■  The emphasis on honoring commitments in general - including commitment of the company to furnish Qard Hasan to the insurance account - is based on the Shari'ah requirement of honoring pledges that are binding to either of the two parties. This viewpoint to which some leading Fuqaha subscribe is well supported by Qur'an, Sunnah and reported Muslim practice, such as the divine Quranic instruction:  {"..Fulfill (all) obligations.."} has been taken by the Fuqaha to comprise any Shari'ah-accepted commitment of the Muslim. There are also several sayings of the Prophet (peace be upon him) which indicate that Muslims are bound to honor their contracts, covenants and pledges.{  Several resolutions of Shari'ah forums and Shari'ah Boards were also issued in this connection including, resolution No. 40 -41 (2-5/3) of the International Islamic Fiqh Academyand the Fatwa of the Shari'ah Supervisory Board ofthe Islamic Insurance Company ofJordan.9
■  The ruling that  responsibility  of providing  the evidence lies with the participant depends on the general rules in the Qur'an, the Sunnah and the opinion of the Ulema that evidence should be established by the claimant. This has been indicated in several Fatawa including Fatwa No. (14/6) ofthe United Sharf'ah Board of Al Baraka Group.
• Permissibility of the two types of Islamic insurance (mentioned  in this Standard) rests on the various evidences ofpermissibility ofIslamic insu• rance in general, as discussed earlier, and are supported by various Fatawa of Sharf'ah Boards. Such Fatawa include Fatwa No. 2/9 ofthe 2 AI Bara• ka Seminar on Islamic Economics, Fatwa No. 10/3/5 ofthe 10 Al Baraka seminar on Islamic Economics,  and other Fatwa issued by the Shari'ah

(13) See:  Chapters on Mudarabah in  books of various schools of Fiqh,  and the term
"Mudarabah" in the Kuwaiti Encyclopedia.
(14) See:  "Mabda' AL-Rida Fi AI-'Uqud: Dirasah  Muqaranh"  (Principle of Consent in
Contracts: A Comparative Study) and its references.
(IS) See: Magazine of the International Islamic Fiqh Academy, Issue No. (5), (2/754- 965). (16) "Fatawa Al-Ta 'min", (P. 106).



695





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

Supervisory Boards ofDubai Islamic Bank, Kuwait Finance House, Qatar
Islamic Bank and the Islamic Insurance Company - Jordan.(
■  The rulings relating to the contract  as such are based on the general principles of contracts  in Islamic Shari'ah, which emphasize avoidance of fraud and deceit and the need to observe the time limits indicated in the contracts. Shari'ah rulings on compensation have also been resorted to in this connection, in addition to the Fatawa and resolutions issued by various forums such as the Islamic Fiqh Academy of the Muslim World League, the Supreme Council of Ulema of Saudi Arabia and the Sharf'ah boards of Islamic banks and Islamic insurance companies.9
■  The jurisdictions  of the  company are determined  on the basis of its articles ofassociation, the various documents that govern the contractual relationship, the general principles ofcontracts and conditions, insurance conventions, and some Fatawa of Shari'ah boards.
■  The rules that regulate the relationship between the company and the policyholders  are based on the articles of association,  which consider this relationship as an agency contract (remunerated or free of charge) for the management ofthe insurance operations, and Mudarabah for the investment of the insurance assets.
■  Indemnity is based on the general Shari'ah directives emphasizing the principle that "one should neither tolerate harm nor cause it to others9 as well as the general principles and rules of Fiqh that advocate fair, and at the same time, non-obsessive indemnification for injury. Furthermore, inferences on indemnity could also be drawn from the cooperative nature of this donation-oriented  contract, in addition to some Fatawa such as Fatwa No. (3) of the 10 Al Baraka Seminar on Islamic Economics, and the various Fatawa of the Shari'ah boards of Islamic banks and Islamic insurance companies.

(17) "Fatawa Al-Ta 'min" (pp. 193-206).
(18) ibid.
(19) This Hadith  has been related by Malik in "AL-Muwatta"", "Kitab AI-Aqdiyah"; Ahmad in "Musnad AL-Imam Ahmad" [1: 313] and [5: 527]; and Ibn Majah in his "AL-Hashiyah" [2: 782].
(20)  "Fatawa Al-Ta 'min, (P.  153).



696





Shari'ah Standard No. (26): Islamic Insurance

■  Treatment of the insurance surplus is based on the cooperative nature of the contract and the practice ofthe Sahabah [companions of the Prophet (peace be upon him)] with regard to Nihd, as reported by Bukhari.3
■  Possibility of contract termination  stems from the fact that the insurance
contract is a time-specific contract, and therefore it expires at the end of its stipulated period just like Ijarah (hiring). The insurance contract also expires on the damage of the insured property (or death of the insured), as there will be no object of commitment.





























(21) Al-Bukhari in his "Sahih" [15:  128)  commented on Nihd or Nahd  where he said ( ....since Muslims did not see any harm in Nihd, in which the members ofthe group consume different amounts of the food to which they have equally contributed) and he narrated some sayings of the Prophet (peace be upon him) that support this practice. In "Fath AL-Bart" [5:  129], Ibn Hajar indicated that Nihd was an ancient practice of Muslim travelers who used to contribute equally to the stock of food they need during their journey,  and leave each of them free to consume the portion of the food he needs. At the end ofthe journey, they distribute the food leftover among themselves, unless they decide to keep it for another journey. This is quite similar to the treatment of the surplus in Islamic Insurance.



697





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Premium

It is the amount of the contribution, which the participant donates, along with its related profits, for the benefit of the insurance scheme.

Insurance Amount

It is the amount paid by the company out ofthe insurance account at the occurrence of the risk insured against.

Risk Insured Against

It is the probable, legally acceptable, accident.

Commercial Insurance

It is a contract between an insured party and a technical insuring body, stipulating that the former pays the latter a specific number  of financial installments or a lump sum amount, against the commitment of the latter to bear a risk that can be insured against, through payment of an estimated financial indemnity to the insured or the beneficiary,  on the occurrence of the risk.  [Clause No.  (747) of the Egyptian law, Clause No. (773) of the Kuwaiti Law and Clause No. (983) ofthe Iraqi Law].

Cooperative Insurance

A collective insurance contract is a contract whereby each participant undertakes to pay a specific amount of money as donation to indemnify any member of the group who encounters the risk insured against.

Islamic Insurance

It is a kind of cooperative insurance, which covers all types of risks, un• der the management ofa specialized company that adheres to the rules and principles ofShari'ah. In this sense, Islamic insurance differs from coopera•



698





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islami c Insurance

tive insurance as the latter only covers a specific group ofbeneficiaries who might encounter risks, for instance, merchants, sailors and the like while Islamic insurance is available to the general public. Islamic insurance also differs from cooperative Insurance with regard to adherence to the rules and principles of Islamic Shari'ah as well as in some technical aspects per• taining to premiums. In cooperative insurance, premiums may be variable at the beginning; whereas in organized Islamic insurance, premiums  are specific due to use of precise statistical studies.

Mutual Insurance, the Alternate to Life Insurance

It is the insurance that covers the risks ofdeath, inability, injury or illness, for the individual or the group, through payment ofthe insurance amount to the participant or the beneficiary, as per the agreement

Surplus

The Surplus comprises of residual premiums  of the participants  (the insured) in addition to the reserves and profits, after deducting all expenses and indemnity amounts (paid or payable during the same year). The residual amount, thus computed, is considered as surplus, rather than profit.

Gharar

It is what one cannot predict its unrevealed/unknown consequences. Something that may occur/materialize or may not@3,

Participant

The Participant  is a person  who  accepts the  cooperative  insurance scheme, signs the insurance policy and undertakes  to observe its conse• quent commitments. It may be referred as the insured, the insured for and the policyholder.

Insurance Account

It is the account established by the company by virtue of its articles of association, to accommodate the premiums of the participants and the returns thereon as well as the reserves. Such account has an independent

(22) See:  "AI-Gharar Wa Atharahu Fi AI-'Uqud" (P. 53).



699





Shari'ah Standard No.  (26): Islamic Insurance

financial liability towards its own claims and commitments, though it is represented by the company for its all affairs. This account is also known as the insurance fund, the policyholders account or the portfolio  of the participants group.



















































700

























Shari'ah Standard No.  (27)



Indices












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface...................................................................................................        705
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        706

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               706
2. Definition and Main Applications of the Index....................................        706
3. Bases of Calculation and Characteristics of Indices                                 707
4. Types of Indices                                                                                        708
5. Permissible Methods of Using Indices...................................................       708
6. Impermissible Methods of Using Indices..............................................       709
7. Development of an Islamic Index...........................................................        710
8. Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................       710
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        711
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        712
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard....................................        714
Appendix (c):  Definitions..............................................................................        716





















703








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


The purpose of this standard is to present basic information about In• dices with special emphasis on their nature, functions, Shari'ah status of their various applications, and to what extent Islamic financial institutions (Institution/Institutions)may apply them.































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



705





Sharf'ah Standard No. (27): Indices





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers definition of Indices, methods oftheir calculation, their main types, their various forms of applications, and the Shari'ah status of each of these forms. The Standard also sets out the Shari'ah rulings that govern Indices.

2. Definition and Main Applications  of the Index

1/2 An Index is a statistically computed figure based on a selected package offinancial papers or commodities dealt in organized or non-organized financial markets, or in both. Each paper/commodity is given a specific weight, according to its market value, and the total value is divided by a constant figure. Among the best-known indices at present are the Consumer Price Index,  and the Dow Jones and FTSE indices in the financial markets.

2/2 An  Index that is well designed  to measure  the market  situation, indicates the general economic situation  of the country, and may help in forecasting its future developments before any change takes place and, thus, facilitates investment  decisions. An  index  may also provide a signal to investors about the future movement ofthe prices of financial papers, or demonstrate a certain downward  or upward trend of such prices. Due to the inconsistency that might occur between  one index and another, indices  are used besides other analytical methods, as well as the experience and knowledge about the market situations and the predominant models of transactions.

2/3 The upward and downward movements of an index reveal the di• rections of the market, and hence the market is denoted as a rising or a declining market.



706





Sharf'ah Standard No. (27): Indices

3. Bases of Calculation and Characteristics of Indices

3/1 Calculation of indices is a process that depends on several aspects including past and current price forecasts, market projections, time intervals, upper and lower limits ofdealing prices, and display charts.

3/2  Indices differfrom each other inseveral aspects suchas the components of the index or the type of data it attempts to summarize, the weight it assigns to each component, and the method of calculation thereof. There are, however, some common characteristics among all well• known indices in the capital and commodity markets, regardless of the data that each index attempts to analyze. Most important  among these characteristics are accuracy, objectivity and transparency.

Accuracy refers to proper  specification of the components  of the index, sources of its data input, time of obtaining the data, method of calculating the weights, and basis of rounding off the numbers.

Objectivity entails presentation ofthe detailed calculations ofthe index to leave no room for difference ofopinion with regard to determination of the value of the index on a specific date or at a specific place.

Transparency entails pre-specification ofthe time, place, and method of announcing the readings ofthe index so that the process does not involve Jahalah (ignorance or uncertainty).

3/3 There are some general principles  that govern almost all indices, such as:

3/3/1 The absolute value of the index has no implication when pre• sented as a single figure. The value of the index, at a given point  of time,  becomes meaningful only when compared to the past and future values of the index. Only then, the trend and  percentage of change  may be observed.  For instance, an increase of 9 points in the value of the index may represent
2% of its previous value.

3/3/2 The values ofthe index at different periods may be multiplied or divided by any constant figure (i.e., increasing or decreasing



707





Sharf'ah Standard No. (27): Indices

the figures ofthe index by the same percentage like division of shares), without   affecting the  accuracy  of its implications. That is to say, the implications of the index are confined to what  it represents  of the  average upwards  and  downwards changes in the weights of its components from time to time.

4. Types of Indices

Indices are classified according to different considerations:

4/1  With regard to their general or specific nature, indices may be clas•
sified into the following categories:
■  General Indices that measure the market situation in general.
■  Sectoral Indices that measure the market situation  of a certain sector or industry, such as the transport sector.
4/2 Indices that precede price movements may be classified, with regard to central and area fluctuations, into the following categories:
■  Centered Oscillating Indices, which measure price changes du• ring a specific period in the past,  and indicate probable future events.
• Ranged Oscillating Indices (band) that  fluctuate between two areas, like overbuying or overselling.
5. Permissible Methods of Using Indices

5/1  It is permissible in Shari'ah to use indices to discern the magnitude of change in  a certain  market,  or to judge  the  performance  of specialized managers by comparing the returns they achieve to the indices. Indices may be used to form up an idea about a portfolio or to estimate its systematic risks instead of monitoring the performance and risks of each financial paper independently. Moreover, Indices may also be used for forecasting the future situation of the market and discovering the pattern ofchanges that the market may undergo. Therefore, using indices for guidance in operations that relate to real transactions is permissible in Sharf'ah.

5/2 It is permissible to use indices as a benchmark for comparison of funds and investment bonds, or for correlating the remuneration of



708





Sharf'ah Standard No. (27): Indices

the manager or the bonus ofthe agent to the investment, or the bonus of the Mudarib to the results ofthe Mudarabah.

5/3 It is permissible to use an index like LIBOR, or a certain share/ commodity  price index,  as a basis for determining  the profit  of a Murabahah pledge, provided that the contract is to be concluded on a specific profit that does not vary with further  changes in the index.  [see Shari'ah Standard No. (8) on Murabahah - Item 4/6]

5/4 It is permissible to use the index to determine the portion  of the variable Ujrah (rent) that represents the return. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (9) on Ijarah and Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek - para 5/2/3]

5/5 It  is permissible  that  work  rules,  regulations  and  the  arrange• ments, pertaining to money-based employment contracts, stipulate a provision  on wage indexation.Wage indexation  here  refers to periodical  adjustment  of wages according to changes in the price level, as determined  by the concerned bodies. However, in case of accumulation  of unpaid wage that takes the form of debt, Sharfah rulings on debts should be observed.

5/6 It is permissible to link the deals to be undertaken by the Mudarib or the agent to a specific index, so that he can dispose ofthe commodity at the market price when the index reaches a certain reading, or purchase a certain amount ofthe commodity at a specific reading of the index.

5/7 It is permissible to connect the fulfillment of a binding pledge on the part of a buyer or a seller to the rate ofincrease or decrease ofa specific index in comparison to the price ofthe commodity at a particular date, so that any further increase may be added to the price ofthe commodity.

5/8  It is permissible to link the amount ofa donation to a charitable body, in case of delayed settlement, with a particular index, at one end.

6. Impermissible Methods of Using Indices

6/1 Shari'ah prohibits trading  in indices or taking advantage of their changes in the financial markets,  through  payment  or receipt of



709





Sharf'ah Standard No. (27): Indices

money on the mere occurrence of certain readings ofthe index, and without selling or buying the real assets which the index represents or any other assets. Such dealing is prohibited even if it is practiced for the sake of hedging against potential risk.

6/2 It is prohibited in Sharf'ah to conclude option contracts on indices. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (20) on Sale of Commodities in Organized Markets - item 5/2]

6/3  It is also prohibited in Shari'ah to conclude contracts on the Index
Contracts' Multiplier.

6/4 It is also prohibited in Shari'ah to link a contract that should not be suspended, like selling, to a specific index.

6/5 It is prohibited in Sharf'ah to connect the amount of a cash debt, at the time oflending, to the price index.

7. Development of an Islamic Index

The following points should be observed while developing an Islamic
Index:

7/1  Adherence to Shari'ah precepts, in addition to the technical controls relating to the components of the index, and its applications.
7/2 There should be a Shari'ah Supervisory Board for the Index, to ensure observation of the Shari'ah precepts in the components and applica• tions of the index,  and to conduct periodical review and reporting relating thereto.

8. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 12 Jumada I, 1427 A.H., corresponding to
3-9June 2006 A.D.












710





Sharf'ah Standard No. (27): Indices





Adoption of the Standard


The Sharf'ah standard on Indices was adopted by the Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. ( 16) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah on 7-12 Jumada I, 1427 A.H., corresponding to 3-9 June 2006 A.D.













































711





Sharf'ah Standard No. (27): Indices





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


The Shari'ah board decided in its meeting No. (8) held on 28 Safar - 4
Rabi' I, 1423  A.H.,  corresponding  to 11-16  May 2002 A.D.,  in Makkah
Al-Mukarramah, to issue a Shari'ah Standard on Indices.

On 12 Jumada I,  1424 A.H., corresponding to 12 July 2003 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a draft Standard on Indices.

The Committee  (2) discussed the draft Standard  in its meeting No. (15) held in Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain, on 8 Jumada I,  1426 A.H., corresponding to 15 June 2005 A.D., and made necessary changes thereto in the light of the discussions and comments of its members.

The  Committee  (2) once again discussed  the  draft  Standard in its meeting No. (16) held in Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain, on 4-5 Sha'ban
1426 A.H., corresponding to 8-9 September 2005 A.D., and incorporated necessary changes therein in the light of the discussions and observations ofthe meeting.

The revised draft of the Standard was submitted to the Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. (15) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 22-26 Sha'ban
1426  A.H.,  corresponding  to 26-30  September  2005 A.D.  The Shari'ah
Board decided to send the draft Standard to specialized experts for review and comments before discussing it in a public hearing.

AAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain,  on 1  Safar
1427 A.H., corresponding to 1  March 2006 A.D. More than 30 participants representing central banks, Institutions, accounting firms, Shari'ah scholars, academics and other interested parties attended the public hearing. Several



712





Sharf'ah Standard No. (27): Indices

observations were made in the session to which members of the Sharf'ah
Standards Committees (1) and (2) duly responded

The draft Standard was presented to the Drafting Committee in a meeting held in Kingdom ofBahrain on 1 Safar 1427 A.H., corresponding to 1 March
2006 A.D., and several amendments were proposed in the meeting.

The Sharf'ah Board discussed in its meeting No. (16) held in Al-Madinah
Al-Munawwarah, on 7-12 Jumada I, 1427 A.H., corresponding to 3-9 June
2006 A.D., the amendments  proposed  by the Drafting  Committee  and accepted some of them. The Sharf'ah Board then approved the Standard, unanimously for some ofits clauses and by majority for others, as indicated in the minutes of the Board's meetings.







































713





Sharf' ah  Stan dard No. (27): Indices





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


• Developing indices is permissible  in  Shari'ah  because they  constitute a method of forecasting and a means of observing the state of circums• tances (inferences). Resorting to inferences is a well-recognized practice in judicature and financial transactions. Ibn Al-Qayyim in his book on Judicial Methods presented a number ofproofs on permissibility of using inferences.
• Permissibility of using indices to forecast the market situation is derived from acceptability of using inferences for judgment. As indicated above, Shari'ah does not object to using inferences to make current  or future judgment based on past events, or to initiate practical actions in the light ofprobable developments.
• Selling or buying indices is prohibited because it is nothing more than payment or receipt of money for the mere existence of a certain reading or figure.  Such an act constitutes a form of gambling and an illegal act of gaining money. Hence, prohibition  of selling or buying indices has been well emphasized by the Resolution of the International Islamic Fiqh Academy which states that it is not permissible to sell or buy an index, because this constitutes pure gambling. It is an act of selling an imaginary object that never exists.0
• Prohibition of concluding option contracts that are based on indices, or on the index contracts' multiplier, rests on the same reasons for prohibi• tion oftrading in indices, in addition to prohibition of dealing in options themselves. Such transactions  obviously deal with wills and intentions rather than with real commodities. Moreover, prohibition  of dealing in options has been clearly stated in a resolution issued by the International Islamic Fiqh Academy.

(2) Resolution No. 63 (1/7), Resolution of the Islamic Fiqh Academy (P. 127). (3) Resolution No. 63 (1/7), Resolution of the Islamic Fiqh Academy (P. 127).



714





Sharf'ah Standard No. (27): Indices

■  The justification for periodical adjustment  of wages subject to changes in the level ofprices is to pursue application of a fair wage policy, and protect the money income of the employees against deterioration  of purchasing power due to inflation. It is permissible to provide for such a condition  in the contract because conditions between  contracting  parties  are permis• sible in principle, unless they lead to reversing what has been permitted or prohibited by Shari'ah.














































715





Sharf'ah Standard No. (27): Indices





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Index Multiplier

A specific ratio added to the difference in the price of the index on expiry of the date of the transaction.
Centered Oscillating Indices

These are the indices that fluctuate around a given center or point. They measure price change in a past period, and are used for forecasting probable future  events. Such indices precede  market  movements  and measure  the rate of price change during the period under study.
Ranged Oscillating Indices

These are indices that fluctuate between two specific ranges, such as the limit of overbuying  and the limit of overselling.
Benchmark

It refers to any index that represents the performance  of a whole industry or a particular  activity. It can be used as a standard  for measuring the per• formance of investment funds and investment units, or used as an indicator for fixing remuneration  for management  or bonus for the investment agent or the Mudarib.

Hedging

It is a method  for mitigating  investment  risks (such as market risks) by using financial instruments available in the market to curb down the risks that may arise from severe price changes.
Divider

It is the total price of the two shares, divided by the average price before division.



716





Sharf'ah Standard No. (27): Indices

Index Contracts Multiplier

It is a decimal  or simple number,  multiplied  by the  nominal  value of a contract that has been connected to the performance  of a certain index, to calculate the value of the contract based on the performance of that index.



















































717


























Shari'ah Standard No. (28)



Banking Services in Islamic Banks












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                             723
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................        724

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               724
2. Types of Banking Services and Their Shari'ah Status...........................       724
3. Date of Issuance of the Standard                                                              727
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        728
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        729
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard...................................         731
































721






Sharf'ah Standard No. (28): Bankin g Services in Islami c Banks

IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


The purpose ofthis standard is to indicate banking services provided by Islamic financial Institutions (Institution/Institutions)," and the Shari'ah opinion on the fees charged for such services.

































(1) The word {Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



723





Shar f'ah   Stan dar d N o.  (28):  B ankin  g Servi ces in Islamic Banks





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This  standard  covers the  most  important banking  services that  do not involve lending and borrowing,  and which the Institutions  render to their customers, directly or through  other parties, with the aim of facilitating internal and external operations and activities performed by these customers.

It does not cover loan and investment services, or other banking services for which separate Shari'ah standards have already been issued, such as trading in currencies, debit and credit cards, investment accounts, and investment Sukuk.

2. Types of Banking Services and Their Shari'ah Status

Institutions may provide banking services against fees payable in lump sum or as a percentage share of the value of the service in question, as indicated in the following cases:

2/1  Custodian services

Institutions may receive Shari'ah-accepted documents and financial papers  from their  customers  as a custodian  of such documents/ financial papers, and may charge fees for such services.

2/2 Contracting agency services

A customer  may use the institution  as an agent for concluding contracts such as sale, purchase, and lease contracts,  against a fee payable to the institution.

2/3 Subscription arrangement services

2/3/1  The institution may act as an agent ofthe founding shareholders of a Shari'ah-accepted and technically licensed joint stock company, in performing the various steps ofthe public issue, or issuing new



724





Sharf'ah Standard No. (28): Bankin g Services in Islamic Banks

shares to increase the capital of the company, and may receive fees for such services. However, the fees thus earned by the Institution should not comprise any remuneration for extending credit, if it happens to be part of the service.

2/3/2  The  Institution  may  arrange,  and  receive  fees  for,  engaging a third party to underwrite the subscription. The Institution may also underwrite  the  subscription  itself, without  charging  any fees for the mere act of underwriting. However, the Institution may  charge the  actual  expenses it incurs  in  providing  other services like conducting  studies or marketing  the shares.  [see Shari'ah Standard No.  (5) on Guarantees, item 6/7]

2/4 Services of conducting studies and consultancies

2/4/1 The institution  may conduct,  against a fee or free of charge, feasibility studies or other studies relating to issuance of shares.

2/4/2 The institution  may act as an agent of its customers, for a fee or free of charge, in performing services that relate to real estate properties  (residential buildings, commercial  blocks, offices, etc.) as well as movable assets.

2/5 Collection and payment services

2/5/1  The institution  may accept requests of its customers to collect their dues with, or pay their commitments to other parties. For instance,  it can perform  collection of cheques, debt notes, and promissory notes from debtors, or vouchers of shares and Sukuk owned  by the  customers,  and  deposit  the  proceeds  in  their accounts. It can also make payments on behalf of its customers and charge their accounts.  For all such services, the Institution
may receive fees from the customers or their agents.

2/5/2 The  institution   may pay wages and  salaries on behalf  of its customers.

2/5/3 The institution  may execute standing  collection and payment orders.



725





Shar f'ah   Stan dar d N o.  (28):  B ankin  g Servi ces in Islamic Banks

2/5/4 The institution  should refrain from collection when it realiz• es that it involves an impermissible  practice, or leads to dis• counting  of a commercial  paper. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (16) on Commercial Paper, item 5]

2/6 Accounts services

2/6/1 The institution may provide additional services to the owners of its investment or current accounts when they desire so, and charge fees for such services.

2/6/2 The institution may provide free services to the owners of its investment  or current  accounts, provided  that  the  services rendered  to the owners of the current  accounts are not set as a precondition or constitute a traditionally  observed prereq• uisite for opening the account. [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (19) on Loan (Qard), item 10/2]

2/7 Services of safe deposit vaults

2/7/1  The institution may provide the services of leasing safe deposit vaults to its customers. This is done through signing a contract according to which the Institution allocates a safe deposit vault within its premises for the customer to use against a specific fee. The deal here is based on ljarah (hiring) contract that entitles the customer to the vault's usufruct.

2/7/2 The institution is responsible for ensuring the safety ofthe vault.
However, it does not guarantee the safety of items kept in vault except in case of misconduct or negligence in keeping the vault.

2/8 Services of cards and their related bodies

See Shari'ah Standard No. (2) on Debit Card, Charge Card and Credit
Card.

2/9 Zakah account services

See Sharf'ah Standard No. (35) on Zakah, item 2/2.

2/10 Suretyship services

See Sharf'ah Standard No. (5) on Guarantees, item 6



726





Sharf'ah Standard No. (28): Bankin g Services in Islamic Banks

2/11   Cheques services

See Shari'ah Standard No.  (16) on Commercial Papers, item 3/3 and item 7.

3. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 12 Jumada I, 1427 A.H., corresponding to 8
June 2006 A.D.














































727





Shar f'ah   Stan dar d N o.  (28):  B ankin  g Servi ces in Islamic Banks





Adoption of the Standard


The  Sharf'ah  standard  on  Banking  Services  in  Islamic Banks was adopted by the Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. (16) held in Al-Madinah Al -Munawwarah  on 7-12  Jumada  I,  1427  A.H.,  corresponding  to 3-8
June 2006 A.D.











































728





Sharf'ah Standard No. (28): Bankin g Services in Islamic Banks





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board decided in its meeting No.  (10) held on 2-7  Rabi' I,  1424 A.H., corresponding to 3-8 May 2003 A.D., in AI-Madinah Al• Munawwarah to issue a Sharf'ah Standard on Banking Services and Facilities in Islamic Banks.

On 29 Safar 1425 A.H., corresponding to 19 April 2004 A.D., the Sharf'ah Standards Committee (2) decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a draft standard on Banking Services and Facilities in Islamic Banks.

In the meeting of the Shari'ah Standards Committee (2) on 14-15 Safar
1426 A.H., corresponding to 24-25 March 2005 A.D., in the Kingdom of Bahrain,  the committee discussed the study and advised the consultant to incorporate the necessary changes, in the light of the discussions and observations of the Committee members.

In the meeting No. (17) of the Shari'ah Standards Committee (1) held on 8-9 Sha'ban 1426 A.H., corresponding to 8-9 September 2005 A.D., in the Kingdom Of Bahrain, the Committee discussed the draft standard and introduced necessary changes therein.

The Sharf'ah Board discussed,  in its meeting No.  (15) held on 22-26
Sha'ban  1426  A.H.,  corresponding  to  26-30  September 2005  A.D.,  in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, the draft of the Standard, and decided, in the light of the discussions and observations of the members,  to send it to Shari'ah Standards Committee (1) for review.

A joint committee comprising the members of Shari'ah Standards Com•
mittees (1) and (2) discussed the Standard in a meeting held on 1  Safar 1427
A.H., corresponding to 1  March 2006 A.D., in the Kingdom of Bahrain, and incorporated necessary changes.



729





Shar f'ah   Stan dar d N o.  (28):  B ankin  g Servi ces in Islamic Banks

The revised draft of the Standard was submitted to the Shari'ah Board in its meeting  No.  (16)  held in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah  on 7-12
Jumada I, 1427  A.H., corresponding to 3-8 June, 2006 A.D. The Sharf'ah
Board made further  changes in the document  and decided to send it to the concerned experts for review and observations before discussing it in a public hearing.

AAOIFI then held, in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 6 Rajah 1427 A.H., corresponding to 31  July,  2006, the public hearing which was attended by more than 30 participants representing central banks, Institutions, accounting firms,  Shari'ah scholars,  university teachers and  other  interested parties. Several observations were made in the session to which the members of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) duly responded.

The Shari'ah Board adopted, in its meeting No. (17) held in Makkah Al• Mukarramah on 26 Shawwal - 1 Dhul-Qa'dah, 1427 A.H., corresponding to
18-23 November, 2006 A.D., the Standard (unanimously for some clauses and with the majority for others), as indicated in the minutes ofthe Board's meetings.





























730





Sharf'ah Standard No. (28): Bankin g Services in Islamic Banks





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


•  It is permissible for the Institutions  to provide banking services that do not involve interest-based lending and borrowing, because such services serve a permissible interest ofthe clients.
•  Institutions may charge fees for providing banking services, because the
fees so charged constitute a remuneration which the Institutions  deserve for the tasks they perform, since it is permissible in Shari'ah to get reward for performing tasks that result in permissible benefits to others.
•  The fee charged by the institutions may be a lump sum amount or a percen•
tage of the value of the service, because when the percentage remuneration is calculated it becomes like the lump sum amount































731























Shari'ah Standard No. (29)



Stipulations and Ethics of Fatwa in the Institutional Framework












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                             737
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................        738

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               738
2. Definition of Fatwa and Istifta' (Seeking Fatwa)                                       738
3. Shari'ah Ruling on Fatwa and Istifta'.                                                       738
4. Scope of Fatwa (Content)........................................................................       739
5. Conditions on Mufti (Fatwa Issuers).....................................................       739
6. Duties of the Institution 1hat Seeks Fatwa............................................       739
7. Methods and Means of Fatwa.................................................................        740
8. Fatwa Controls..........................................................................................       741
9. Text of Fatwa............................................................................................        743
10. Fatwa Manuscript  (Document)...............................................................       743
11. Retreat From a Mistaken Fatwa                                                                744
12. Morals of Fatwa (Ethics of Fatwa Issuers)..............................................       744
13. Date of Issuance of the Standard.............................................................       745
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        746
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        747
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard.....................................        749
Appendix (c):  Definitions..............................................................................       752













735








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


The purpose  of this  standard  is to  indicate  the  meaning  of Fatwa (Shari'ah opinion), elucidate the eligibility conditions for issuance thereof, and define its appropriate means and scope. The standard also aims to identify the observed methods of Fatwa presentation and explain how an erroneous Fatwa can be rectified.



































737





Shari'ah Standard No. (29): Stipulations and Ethics of Fatwa in the Institutional Framework





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard  covers the area of Fatwa because it is one of the tasks assigned to Shari'ah Supervisory Boards (Board/Boards) of the Islamic Financial Institutions (Institution/Institutions).

2. Definition of Fatwa and Istifta'  (Seeking Fatwa)

2/1  The term Fatwa refers to a Sharf'ah opinion presented to a person who seeks it with regard to an incidence that has already occurred (the Fatwa incidence) or is expected to occur. It does not refer to answering queries pertaining to hypothetical incidences.

2/2  Istifta' refers to the act ofseeking the Shari'ah opinion on an incidence that has already occurred or expected to occur.

3. Shari'ah Ruling on Fatwa and Istifta

3/1  Originally, Fatwa is a collective duty that can be discharged ofby any one ofthose who are able to do it. Fatwa could, however, become the personal duty of the individual if he happens to be the only one in the community who is eligible to issue it.

3/3 The board has to provide Fatwa to the Institution by virtue of their relationship.

3/4  It is the duty ofthe Institution to seek Fatwa on incidences that actually occur or are expected to occur.  It should also seek Fatwa for every operation that it intends to pursue.

3/5 Although the seeker of the Fatwa is free to use his best efforts to determine the most appropriate source (both in terms ofknowledge and integrity) from whom he will seek the Fatwa, yet according to

(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



738





Shari'ah Stan dard No. (29): Stipulations an d Ethi cs of Fatwa in the Institutional Framework

the rules and regulations, Institutions have to seek Fatwa from their own boards.

4. Scope of Fatwa (Content)

Fatwa in Institutions  is confined to operational  financial rulings and issues pertaining to them such as some rulings on worshipping, as well as permissibility and prohibition in some concerns such as Zakah.

5. Conditions on Mufti (Fatwa Issuers)

5/1  A board member shall be well versed in Fiqh (Islamic Jurisprudence), well informed of the  contributions  of diligent Fiqh scholars,  and has the  ability to  use the  Shari'ah-accepted methods  of deriving reasonable rulings on emerging issues. He shall also be known for his discernment, cautiousness and knowledge about the circumstances and traditions of people, and should always remain alert against the different means ofhuman misbehavior. Competence in Fiqh is usually manifested by the vast reputation of the scholar or his distinguishable contributions especially in the area offinancial transactions performed by institutions.

5/2 Issuing Fatwa to institutions does not require competence in all areas of Fiqh. Fatwa can be issued by a scholar who is competent only in the area offinancial transactions performed by institutions.

5/3 The member  of the Board shall have no personal  interest in the matter for which the Institution seeks Fatwa.

6. Duties of the Institution That Seeks Fatwa

6/1 The Institution  is obliged to follow the  Fatwa once it is issued regardless ofwhether it meets the satisfaction ofthe management or not. This obligation holds true when the Fatwa entails enforcement or prohibition ofa certain act. When the Fatwa entails permissibility of the act in question, the institution  has the right to refrain from following it, if it believes that for practical needs it has to do so. In this case, however, rejection of the board Fatwa should be reported to the General Assembly of the institution.



739





Shari' ah Stan dar d No. (29): Stipulations an d Ethi cs of Fatwa in the Institutional Framework

6/2 Fatwa should be sought again if there are new developments  that should be presented to the Board. New developments may include change or improvement of conception, occurrence of new circum• stances, or non-existence of some of the underlying reasons of the previous Fatwa

6/3 The institution should not follow the Fatwas ofother Shari'ah Advisory
Boards except with permission ofits own Board.

6/4 The institution should not demand Fatwa according to a specific Madhab  (School of Fiqh) even if it is the official school in its host country, or the school that official Fatwa bodies adhere to. However, attention should be given to situations where the legal or judiciary system in the country observes a specific school, and the issue in question may be taken to the courts in the future.

7. Methods and Means of Fatwa

7/1  Fatwa should basically be founded on what has been explicitly stated in the Qur'an and the Sunnah along with what has been supported by Ijma'  (consensus of Fuqaha)  or proved by Qiyas (analogical deduction). After resorting to the preceding sources, the judgment of the Mufti (issuer ofthe Fatwa) with regard to the different viewpoints of the Fuqaha (scholars of Fiqh); i.e, Istihsan (Shari'ah approbation) and Maslahah Mursalah  (public interest) may be considered as the basis for issuance of Fatwa.

7/2 Fatwa should not be based on a personal viewpoint that does not cater for the sources referred to in item (1/7) above, or contradict with the general texts of the  Qur'an and the Sunnah that  have explicit indications. Moreover, Fatwa shall also not fall in disparity with well-established Ijma' or the general rules derived from the Qur'an and the Sunnah.

7/3 Absence of explicit directives in the Qur'an and Sunnah on a given issue, or non-existence of the issue in the prevailing Fiqh literature, do not justify refraining from seeking Fatwa on that issue.  Fatwa in this case may be derived through Shari'ah-sanctioned rules and methods of deduction.



740





Shari'ah Stan dard No. (29): Stipulations an d Ethi cs of Fatwa in the Institutional Framework

7/4 The  board  may  coordinate  with  the  Institution  to  transfer  the Fatwa, if necessary, to a board that is considered to be more reliable due, for instance, to its larger membership, or its inclusion of more specializations, such as Fiqh academies, AAOIFI Board and the Supreme Shari'ah boards.

7/5 Among the means that may be used for reaching the appropriate
Shari'ah ruling on a given issue are the following:

7/5/1 Building  detailed knowledge about  the  issue of the  Fatwa through  questioning the one who seeks it, consulting other boards, resorting to experts and specialized parties, and talcing into consideration the prevailing norms and tradition.

7/5/2 Tracing the Shari'ah ruling on the issue in the different schools of Fiqh, and exerting due endeavors to ascertain if the issue encounters the existence ofcontradicting proofs, or it is an issue that has not been specifically dealt with in the Qur'an and the Sunnah or discussed by the Fuqaha.

7/5/3 Making use of collective Fatwas,  such as the resolutions  of the Islamic Fiqh Academy, other Shari'ah Advisory Boards, seminars, and conferences.

7/6 The board should issue Fatwa whenever the Institution approaches it for that purpose, except when it feels that the Institution may use the Fatwa for committing a impermissible action. In that case, the board may either refrain from issuing the Fatwa, or make it subject to certain restrictions.

7/7 Endeavors should be made for disseminating the Fatwas of the In• stitution and exchanging them with other Institutions  and related bodies.

8. Fatwa Controls

8/1 Derivation of presumptive indications from the texts, or usage of unattested narrations about the Prophet (peace be upon him) should be avoided. Moreover, all the Sunnah texts used for supporting the Fatwa should be well-documented.



741





Shari' ah Stan dar d No. (29): Stipulations an d Ethi cs of Fatwa in the Institutional Framework

8/2  Fatwa issuers, while issuing the Fatwa, shall signify keenness to quote Ijma' and opinions  of diligent Fuqaha from their accredited sources, as well as concentration on those opinions  which have gained more accreditation  in each School of Fiqh, and should resort to available Fiqh literature  on principles of issuing Fatwa.

8/3  When the Fatwa offers the chance for choice between two permissible actions,  preference  shall be given to the  easier.  If choosing  one of the two permissible actions would  result  in realization  of a lawful interest  while  choosing  the  other  would  leave the  door  open  for blight, leaving the door open for blight should be avoided, and efforts shall be exerted to resolve the repercussions  that may subsequently result.

8/4  Fatwa issuers shall not always pursue  Shari'ah exemptions  to make matters easier for Institutions. A Shari'ah exemption should be sought only when  it results  from  thorough  examination  of the  issue  and appropriate  reasoning.  Moreover,  it has to be ensured  that  making use of the  Shari'ah  exemption  does not  embody  a related  act that the  Fuqaha  unanimously  consider  as prohibited,  or lead to issuing different  Fatwas  for  two  identical  incidences.  Misuse  of Sharf'ah exemptions in this manner  is known in Fiqh as "Talfiq" (fabrication).

8/5 Fatwa issuers shall not direct Institutions to impermissible tricks for escaping Shari'ah restrictions, or violating the objectives of Shari'ah legislation.

8/6  Fatwa shall not be issued hastily,  declaring (for instance)  prohibition of an act for the mere sense of condemnation  that the one feels towards new habits and traditions, unless such habits and traditions contradict with  the  rules  and  principles  of the  Sharah.  Similarly,  declaring permissibility of an act shall not come for the mere sake of following rules and traditions.

8/7  It shall be made clear, when necessary, that declaring permissibility of an act is by no means amount to recommending that act or making a call for performing  it.



742





Shari'ah Stan dard No. (29): Stipulations an d Ethi cs of Fatwa in the Institutional Framework

9. Text of Fatwa

9/1  The Fatwa shall be clearly stated so that it may not be misunderstood by the layman, or taken to mean different things to those who have bad intentions.

9/2 When there are more than one Fiqh opinion on the same issue, the board shall declare the specific opinion that it subscribes to. If the issue is controversial the board has to explain the specific bases ofits choice.

9/2 When the Fatwa has more than one aspect all such aspects have to be clearly indicated

9/3 In principle,  mentioning  the proof is not an underlying condition for issuing the Fatwa, and the Institution has no right to impose it as a condition for accepting it. However, the board has to refer to the bases of its Fatwa.

9/4 The Fatwa statement  shall be precise, concise and free from any confusing details and preachy expressions that have nothing to do with serving the purpose. If, however, the subject requires detailed statement for the sake of public interest or so as to convince the regulatory and supervisory bodies, it would be better to add such expressions, in order to justify the ruling, indicate the goal behind it, and warn against falling into blights.

9/5 There is no harm to provide more information  than what has been requested by the seeker of the Fatwa in order to leave no room for confusion, or to distinct the opinion from other similar opinions, or to serve a future need ofthe Fatwa seeker.

10. Fatwa Manuscript  (Document)

10/1 In principle, Fatwa can be issued by uttering, signaling or acting, but for Institutions  it should be written to become an evidence or a document that can be referred to.

10/2 Fatwa shall be started by the Verse ofBasmalah (i.e., In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful), along with praise to Allah and blessings on Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him).



743





Shari' ah Stan dar d No. (29): Stipulations an d Ethi cs of Fatwa in the Institutional Framework

At the end of the Fatwa, the same expressions  could be repeated or,  in  stead,  expressions  like  "Allahu A'lam" (Allah knows  best) could be introduced to indicate closing up of the Fatwa statement

10/3  Fatwa shall be clearly handwritten or typed,  and  each page of it shall be initialed.  It should also carry the date of its issuance and the official stamp of its issuing source, if such stamp is available.

10/4 Clear linkage between the Fatwa request and the Fatwa statement should be indicated. Preferably, there shall be a precise summary of the question.

10/5 When the Fatwa is issued by the concerned board ofthe Institution, the content of the Fatwa shall be stated in the formal proceedings of the board meeting.
11. Retreat from a Mistaken Fatwa

11/1  The board has to retreat from its Fatwa if it is proved to be wrong on reviewing, or on examination by a higher body. In such case, the board has to inform the Institution  so as to rectify the ruling and its consequent effects. The Institution  on its part has to correct all the actions that had been based on the wrong Fatwa and refrain from adopting it any more.

11/2  The board, on its own initiative or on request of the institution, has the right to review a previous Fatwa even if such revision would lead to issuing a new Fatwa that  contravenes  the former one.  In such case, the Institution  has to follow the new Fatwa in the future and rectify the effects and repercussions of the old one.

12. Morals of Fatwa (Ethics of Fatwa Issuers)

12/1 Being slow and cautious in explaining the Fatwa, and avoiding over•
courage in making Fatwa decisions.

12/2 Avoidance of issuing different Fatwas, on the same subject and the same issue, according to the source of the Fatwa request.

12/3 Fatwa issuer should  avoid issuing Fatwa when he is mentally  in• volved in a personal  affair that  leaves him no room  for offering correct judgment.



744





Shari'ah Stan dard No. (29): Stipulations an d Ethi cs of Fatwa in the Institutional Framework

12/4  Keeping the secrets of the Institution  and its employees, as well as the application mechanisms, which have been revealed to the board in the Fatwa process. Dealing with such secrets should not surpass the  limits  of illustrating  the  Fatwa, to  indulge  into  unnecessary disclosure of information   on technical  means and procedures  of application.

13. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 1  Dhul-Qa'dah 1427 A.H., corresponding to
23 November 2006 A.D.










































745





Shari' ah Stan dar d No. (29): Stipulations an d Ethi cs of Fatwa in the Institutional Framework





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah standard on Controls and Ethics of Fatwa in the Institutional Framework was adopted by the Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. (16) held in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah  on 1  Dhul-Qa'dah  1427 A.H., corresponding to 23 November 2006 A.D.











































746





Shari'ah Stan dard No. (29): Stipulations an d Ethi cs of Fatwa in the Institutional Framework





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board decided in its meeting No. (14) held in Dubai (U.A.E) on 21-23 Rabi' I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 30 April- 2 May 2005 A.D., to issue a Shari'ah Standard on Controls and Ethics ofFatwa in the Institutional Framework.

On 29 Jumada I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 6 July 2005 A.D., the Sharf'ah Standards Committee decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a study on Controls and Ethics of Fatwa in the Institutional Framework.

The study was discussed in a meeting of a joint committee comprising Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 8-9 Rabi' I, 1427 A.H., corresponding to 6-7 April 2006 A.D., and the consultant was advised to incorporate necessary changes, in the light ofthe discussions and observations raised in the meeting.

The revised draft of the Standard was submitted to the Shari'ah Board in its meeting No.  (16) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah on 7-12 Jumada I,  1427 A.H.,  corresponding to 3-8  June 2006 A.D.  Further changes were introduced in the draft and the board decided to send it to the concerned experts for review and observations before discussing it in a public hearing.

AAOIFI  then  held,  in  the  Kingdom  of Bahrain  on  6 Rajah  1427
A.H., corresponding  to 31  July 2006 A.D., a public hearing which was attended by more than 30 participants  representing  central banks, institutions, accounting firms, Shari'ah scholars, university teachers and other interested parties. Several observations were made in the session to which the members ofthe Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) duly responded.



747





Shari' ah Stan dar d No. (29): Stipulations an d Ethi cs of Fatwa in the Institutional Framework

In its meeting No. (17) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 26 Shawwal
- 1   Dhul-Qa'dah,  1427  A.H.,  corresponding  to  18-23  November,  2006
A.D., the Shari'ah Board accepted the changes proposed by the participants in the public hearing and adopted the Standard (unanimously for some clauses and with the majority for others), as indicated in the minutes ofthe Board's meetings.
















































748





Shari'ah Standard No. (29): Stipulations and Ethics of Fatwa in the Institutional Framework





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Fatwa is considered as a collective duty that can be discharged of by any one of those who are able to do it, because it is one of the religious func• tions that serve public interest. Therefore, what is required is to have someone in the Muslim community who can issue Fatwa, rather than to have each and every individual of the community able to do so.  Fatwa would become the duty of a specific individual or a group only if that individual or group is the only one who can issue it. If Fatwa were to become the duty of every member of the society, things would be more complicated.
■  It is the duty of the institutions to seek Fatwa because otherwise they would not be able to meet their commitments to observe the rules ofthe Islamic Shari'ah. Therefore, Institutions should approach the boards for obtaining Fatwa.  Similarly, it is the duty of the board to issue Fatwa to the Institution due to the relationship that binds the two by virtue ofthe decision of the general assembly (equity owners) of the Institution.
• Acceptance ofthe Fatwa ofa Shari'ah scholar whose knowledge is confined to only one branch of Fiqh, such as financial transactions in institutions, is based on the viewpoint that Ijtihad (reasoning) and Fatwa may be made partially.
■  Preventing the Institution to adopt the Fatwas of other boards, except when allowed by its own board to do so,  stems from the need to bar the way to any tendency of fabrication or attempt to pursue Shari'ah exemptions without observing their relevant controls or their context and circumstances, an act which leads to adoption of irrelevant Fatwas.
• Permissibility of referring the Fatwa to a higher Shari'ah board or to a Fiqh forum for reconsideration, or making use of collective Fatwa, rests on the

(2) Sifat Al-Fatwa Wa Al-Mufti Wa Al-Mustafti", Ibn Hamdan Al-Hanbali (P 52) (3) ibid. (P. 28).



749





Shari'ah Standard No. (29): Stipulations and Ethics of Fatwa in the Institutional Framework

fact that an opinion that gains support from a large group ofeligible scholars is likely to be more reliable. Moreover, collective Fatwa may facilitate more coordination, and avoidance of discrepancies in the Fatwas of the different boards on the same subject
■   Withdrawal or refraining from dissemination ofa certain Fatwa for fear of being misused is based on the principle ofSadd al-Zara 'i which advocates the prohibition of a permissible act if it would (certainly or probably) lead to blight
■  Pursuing Shari'ah exemptions is prohibited because it leads to relaxation ofthe rules ofthe Islamic Shari'ah and induce loss ofkeenness to observe them. Therefore, some Fuqaha hold that pursuing  Shari'ah exemptions amounts to Fisq (rebellion against Allah's Obedience).
• Choosing the easier ruling when two alternative  options  are available is supported  by the  Qur'an  in Allah's Saying:  {"Allah intends for you
ease, and He does not want to make things difficultfor you}, and by

the  Sunnah  in the  Prophetic  Hadith  stating:  "Make  things easier  not harder.".° All these directives are to be considered after reviewing the
specific proofs."
■  The controls relating to the text of the Fatwa are meant to ensure that the Fatwa would achieve its goal without deviating to an invalid meaning. As indicted by Ibn Hamdan" in his book "Sifat Al-Fatwa", drawing attention to these controls and what the ancestor Fuqaha had said about them is meant to ensure the appropriateness ofthe Fatwa.
• Permissibility ofoffering additional information with the Fatwa is shown by the statement ofthe Prophet (peace be upon him) when he was asked about using seawater for Wudu' (ablution): "Seawater is pure and sea car• casses are permissible? (9

(4) "Tlam AL-Muwaqqi'in" by Ibn Al-Qayyim  [1: 222] and Sifat Al-Fatwa Wa Al-Mufti  Wa
Al-Mustafti" by Ibn Hamdan (P. 32). (5) [A1-Baqarah (The Cow): 185]
(6) "Sahih AL-Bukhari" (H: 69); and "Sahih Muslim" (H: 1734). (7) "Rasm Al-Mufti" by Ibn Abidin (P 11).
(8) Sifat Al-Fatwa Wa Al-Mufti Wa Al-Mustafti" by Ibn Hamdan (pp. 58-66). (9) "Sunan Ibn Majah" (H: 386 and 388).



750





Shari'ah Standard No. (29): Stipulations and Ethics of Fatwa in the Institutional Framework

■  The controls on the Fatwa document aim to preserve Fatwa from being misused.
■  The ruling that a wrong Fatwa should be rectified is supported by the
incident when the Caliphate Umar in one case issued a Fatwa that denied some of the brothers the right of inheritance, and later on he issued ano• ther Fatwa that granted such brothers the inheritance right. Having done so he said: the former case was subject to my previous Fatwa, and the new one is subject to the new Fatwa.
■  Avoidance of hasty Fatwa should be observed because it was the prac•
tice of the Sahabah (Companions of the Prophet) and the other leading Fuqaha who succeeded them. In issuing Fatwa, one should not feel shy to say: I do not know, or to postpone the Fatwa until he is in a position to answer it properly.(





























(10) See more elaborations on "Sifat Al-Fatwa Wa Al-Mufti Wa Al-Mustafti"by Ibn Hamdan
(P. 63).
(11) "Jama' Al-Jawami" by AI-Subki (with elaborations by AI-Mahalli)  [2: 391]. (12) "Sifat Al-Fatwa Wa AL-Mufti Wa AI-Mustafti" by Ibn Hamdan (pp. 6-11).



751





Shari' ah Stan dar d No. (29): Stipulations an d Ethi cs of Fatwa in the Institutional Framework





Appendix  (C) Definitions

• Judgment entails the issuance of a verdict which is binding  to the two litigants. In this sense, Fatwa differs from judgment  as the latter entails offering a Shari'ah ruling without enforcing commitment towards it. Fatwa also differs from education, because the latter is not restricted to a specific incident. Therefore, Fatwa is quite distinct  from an initiation  to teach Shari'ah rulings, or a mere act of seeking knowledge about hypothetical incidences.




































752

























Shari'ah Standard No. (30)



Monetization (Tawarruq)












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                             757
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................        758

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               758
2. Definition of Monetization and Its Distinction from Bay' Al-'Inah..        758
3. Mutawarriq (Monetization Beneficiary)                                                   758
4. Controls on Monetization Transactions................................................       758
5. Controls on Monetization When the Institution Is the Beneficiary..       760
6. Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................       760
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        761
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        762
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard....................................        764



























755








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


The purpose of this standard is to indicate the essence of Monetization and explain the Shari'ah conditions for its validity, as well as the controls pertaining to its application in Islamic financial Institutions (Institution/ Institutions).































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



757





S h ari 'ah  S tan d ar d N o .  ( 3 0 ) : M o n e tiza ti o n  ( T a w ar ru q)





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers the different applications ofmonetization, whether the beneficiary is the customer or the institution.

2. Definition of Monetization  and Its Distinction from Bay' Al-'Inah

Monetization refers to the process of purchasing a commodity for a de• ferred price determined through Musawamah (Bargaining) or Murabahah (Mark-up Sale), and selling it to a third party for a spot price so as to obtain cash.

Whereas 'Inah refers to the process of purchasing  the commodity  for a deferred price, and selling it for a lower spot price to the same party from whom the commodity was purchased.

3. Mutawarriq (Monetization Beneficiary)

3/1  The Monetization  beneficiary may be a customer  who purchases the commodity  from the Institution  and sells it to a third party to obtain liquidity. It may also be the Institution itselfwhen it purchases the commodity  from the customer or another Institution  and sells it to a third party to obtain liquidity. The controls for both cases are shown in items (4) and (5) below.

3/2  The institution  should not  perform  Monetization  for the benefit of conventional banks when it discovers that such banks are going to use the liquidity for interest-based lending instead of Shari'ah• compliant operations.

4. Controls on Monetization  Transactions

4/1  The requirements of the contract for purchasing the commodity on deferred payment bases should be fulfilled, for both Musawamah and Murabahah transactions, with due consideration to Shari'ah Standard



758





S h ari 'ah  S tan d ar d N o .  ( 3 0 ) : M o n e tiza ti o n  ( T a w ar ru q)

No. (8)  on Murabahah.  There shall also be a real commodity that the seller owns before selling it. If the process is to involve a binding promise, it shall be from only one party. As regards the commodity sold, it shall not be gold or silver or any type of currency.

4/2 The commodity sold shall be well identified so as to become distinct from the other assets of the seller.  This may be done by separating the commodity from the other assets of the seller, or recording the numbers  of its identifying documents  such as storing certificates. [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (20) on Sale ofCommodities in Organized Markets, item 4/2/2]

4/3 If the commodity  is not made available at the time of signing the contract,  the client shall be given a full description  or a sample that indicates the quantity of the commodity  and the place of its storage, so that his act of purchasing the commodity becomes real rather  than  fictitious. In this sense, using local commodities  for Monetization is more preferable.

4/4 The commodity shall be actually or constructively received by the buyer, and there remains  no further  condition  or procedure  for receiving it.

4/5 The commodity  (object of Monetization)  must be sold to a party other than the one from whom it was purchased on deferred payment basis (third party), so as to avoid 'Inah which is strictly prohibited. Moreover, the  commodity  shall not  return  back to the  seller by virtue of prior agreement or collusion between the two parties, or according to tradition.

4/6 The contract for purchasing the commodity on deferred payment basis, and the contract for selling it for a spot price shall not be linked together in such a way that the client looses his right to receive the commodity. Such linking ofthe two contracts is prohibited whether it is made through stipulation in the documents, acceptance as a normal tradition, or incorporation in the procedures.



759





S h ari 'ah  S tan d ar d N o .  ( 3 0 ) : M o n e tiza ti o n  ( T a w ar ru q)

4/7 The client shall not delegate the Institution or its agent to sell, on his behalf, a commodity that he purchased from the same Institution and, similarly, the Institution shall not accept such delegation. If, however, the regulations do not permit the client to sell the commodity except through the same Institution, he may delegate the Institution to do so after he, actually or constructively, receives the commodity.

4/8 The Institution should not arrange proxy of a third party to sell, on behalf of the client, the commodity that the client purchased from the Institution.

4/9 The client shall not sell the commodity except by himself or through an agent other than the Institution, and shall duly observe the other stipulations.

4/10  The Institution shall provide the client with the information that he or his appointed agent may need for selling the commodity.

5. Controls on Monetization When the Institution Is the Beneficiary

5/1  Monetization is not a mode of investment or financing. It has been permitted when there is a need for it, subject to specific terms and conditions.  Therefore, the Institutions  shall not use Monetization as a means of mobilizing liquidity for their operations,  and exert no effort for fund mobilization through other modes such as Mudarabah, investment agency, Sukuk, investments funds, and the like. The Institution shall resort to monetization  only when it faces the danger of a liquidity shortage that could interrupt the flow ofits operations and cause losses for its clients.

5/2 The  institutions   shall  avoid  proxy  in  selling the  Monetization commodity, even if proxy is to be arranged with a third  party. In other words, Institutions  shall use their own bodies for selling the monetization  commodity, though using brokers for this purpose is permissible.

6. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued 1 Dhul-Qa'dah 1427 A.H., corresponding to 13
November 2006 A.D.



760





S h ari 'ah  S tan d ar d N o .  ( 3 0 ) : M o n e tiza ti o n  ( T a w ar ru q)





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah  standard  on Monetization was adopted by the Shari'ah
Board in its meeting No.  (17) held in Makkah Al Mukarramah  on 26
Shawwal - 1  Dhal-Qa'dah 1427 A.H., corresponding to 18-23 November
2006A.D.











































761





S h ari 'ah  S tan d ar d N o .  ( 3 0 ) : M o n e tiza ti o n  ( T a w ar ru q)





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


The Sharf'ah Board decided in its meeting No. (7) held on 9-13 Ramadan
1422 A.H., corresponding to 24-28 November 2001 A.D., in Makkah Al Mukarramah, to issue a Shari'ah Standard on Monetization, as practiced by banks.

On  17  Sha'ban  1423 A.H., corresponding  to  3  October  2005 A.D., the Sharf'ah Standards Committee (2) decided to commission a Sharfah consultant to prepare an exposure draft on Monetization.

On 6 Rabi' I,  1426 A.H.,  corresponding to  15  April 2005 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee (2) decided to commission another Sharf'ah consultant to redraft the Monetization Standard in the typical format of the other Shari'ah Standards.

The Committee (2) discussed the exposure draft in its meeting No. (15) held in Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain on 8  Jumada I,  1426 A.H., corresponding to 15 June 2005 A.D., and introduced necessary changes in the light of the comments and observations of the members.

A joint committee comprising members from Sharf'ah Standards Com• mittees (1) and (2) discussed the exposure draft in a meeting held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 1  Safar 1427 A.H., corresponding to 1 March 2006
A.D., and introduced further changes in the light of the comments and observations of its members.

In its meeting No.  (16) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah on 7-12
Jumada I, 1427 A.H.,  corresponding to 3-8 June 2006 A.O., the Shari'ah Board discussed the amendments suggested by the joint meeting ofthe two Sharf'ah Committees and accepted what it deemed appropriate.



762





S h ari 'ah  S tan d ar d N o .  ( 3 0 ) : M o n e tiza ti o n  ( T a w ar ru q)

AAOIFI then held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 6
Rajah 1427 A.H., corresponding to 31 July 2006 A.D. The public hearing was attended by more than  30 participants representing  central banks, Institutions, accounting firms, Shari'ah scholars, university teachers and other  interested parties.  Several  observations were made in the public hearing to which the members of the Sharf'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) duly responded.

In its meeting No. (17) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 26 Shawwal
- 1  Dhul-Qa'dah 1427 A.H., corresponding to 18-23 November 2006 A.D., the Shari'ah  Board discussed the changes proposed by the participants in the public hearing, accepted some of them, and adopted the Standard (unanimously for  some  clauses and  with  the  majority  for others),  as indicated in the minutes of the Board's meetings.




































763





Shari'ah Standard No. (30): Monetization (Tawarruq)





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


■  Differentiation between Monetization and 'Inah with regard to permis• sibility and prohibition stems from the fact that, contrary to the former, the latter is a trick for practicing Riha (usury). 'Inah takes place between two parties who are in fact a borrower and a lender.  The lender sells the commodity  to the borrower for a deferred price and buys it back from him for a less price payable on spot. The majority of the Fuqaha subscribe to prohibition of'Inah and permissibility ofmonetization, ex• cept Ibn Taymiyyah and Ibn Al-Qayyim who consider monetization as prohibited or worthy of aversion.
■  Permissibility of constructive receipt of the commodity has already been catered for in the Sharf'ah Standard No.  (18) on Possession (Qabd)  and the Shari'ah Standard No. (1) on Trading in Currencies.
■  Permissibility ofmonetization transactions that observe the Shari'ah controls indicated in this Standard can be traced in the texts of the Qur'an  and the Sunnah that permit sale transactions.  It has also been confirmed by two resolutions issued by the Islamic Fiqh Academy of the Muslim World League,"and the Standing Committee of the Supreme Board of Shari'ah Scholars of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (Fatwa No. 19297), as well as the Fatwas of several Shari'ah Supervisory Boards. Therefore, monetization is an exit for avoiding Riha rather than a trick for performing it, as it is usual-

(2) Resolution ofthe 15 Session which imposes no condition other than that Monetization should  not be performed like 'Inah.  Also,  the Resolution of the 17  Session which comprises other conditions (well-observed in this standard) most important ofwhich is non-commitment of the bank to become the agent of the client in selling the commodity which "makes Monetization similar to 'Inah" - using the same words ofthe Resolution  • and non-violation of the condition relating to receipt ofthe commodity: (the Resolution here did not impose actual receipt only, similar  to what it did in its 11 Session where it considered legal receipt to be sufficient in currency exchange, which requires more controls than sale transactions).



764





Shari'ah Standard No. (30): Monetization (Tawarruq)

ly practiced by those who do not want to be involved in interest-based bor• rowing. It has been reported  by Abdullah Ibn Al-Mubarakthat 'A 'ishah (may Allah be pleased with her) practiced it.
■  Prohibition of joining together the contract for purchasing the commodity and  the  contract  for selling it is justified  by the  fact that  joining  them together  would impose a commitment  on the client to sell the commodity right  away.  Hence,  such  immediate transfer   of the  ownership of the commodity  may not enable the client to receive it. This is again the same reason for prohibition  of agency-related commitments.
■  Permissibly of resorting  to agency of the Institution  when  the client,  by virtue of law, cannot sell the commodity directly, is meant to safeguard the deal from being nullified by the law.
■  The ruling  that  the  Institution  shall provide  detailed  information  about
the commodity to the client aims at preventing fictitious transactions  and helping the client to obtain liquidity. Such requirement holds true whether the commodity  in question  is a commodity, a car, shares of a company, international goods,  or  local  goods.  The  latter  are  more  suitable  for monetization due to the easiness of ensuring their existence, and the chance available to the client to actually hold them ifhe so desires.
■  The ruling that the Institution shall provide the client with a full description or a sample of the commodity is to ensure that the latter's act of purchasing the commodity is actual rather than fictitious.
■  Monetization  (where  the client or the  Institution  is beneficiary)  shall  be
subjected to strict controls and restrictions  so that  institutions  fulfill the main objectives underlying their presence and the interest of customers to make dealings with them.
■  Principally, institutions  have to show strict  commitment towards  using modes ofinvestment and financing such as the various forms ofMusharakah (Partnership)  and exchange of goods, usufructs and services that conform to the very nature and basic activities of Islamic banking. Hence, imposition

(3) Al-Azhari AI-Shafi'i, "AI-Zahir" (P. 216); and "AL-Fa 'iq Fi Ghrib AL-Hadith" [2: 108]. For permissibility of Monetization see also Al-Mardawi,  "Al-Insaf" [4: 250]; "KashshafAl• Qina" [2: 447]  and [3:  185];  "AL-Maughni" [4:  127]; Al-Sarakhsi, "AL-Mabsut",  [11: 211]; and Al-Nawawi, "Al-Rawdah" [3: 416].



765





S h ari 'ah  S tan d ar d N o .  ( 3 0 ) : M o n e tiza ti o n  ( T a w ar ru q)

of controls and restrictions on monetization would curb any tendency for expanding monetization to the extent that jeopardizes the extensive use  of the  original  modes  of  investment  and  financing.  Therefore, Institutions shall not use monetization except in the limited scope defined in this Standard They shall also restrict the use of monetization to the cases of clients whose transactions cannot be disposed of through other modes of financing and investment such as Musharakah, Mudarabah, ljarah, Istisna'a and the like.  Monetization may also be used as a means for helping the clients to dispose of their previous interest-based debts, after ensuring that they have developed genuine intention not to deal in usurious transactions any more.








































766






















Shari'ah Standard No. (31)



Controls on Gharar in
Financial Transactions












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface...................................................................................................        771
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        772

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               772
2. Definition and Types of Gharar                                                                772
3. Shari'ah Status of Gharar                                                                          772
4. Controls on Gharar Which Violates Transactions...............................       772
5.  Scope of Gharar in Exchange-Based Contracts (Uqud al-Muawadat)        774
6. Impact of Gharar on Documentation  Contracts..................................       779
7. Impact of Gharar Which Stems from the Conditions  of the Con- tract............................................................................................................       780
8. Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................       780
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        781
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        782
Appendix (b):  The Sharf'ah Basis for the Standard....................................        784
Appendix (c):  Definitions.............................................................................        788




















769








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This standard aims at defining Gharar (uncertainty), indicating its types and impacts and emphasizing controls that need to be applied when Gharar is to the extent which nullifies transactions.







































771





Sharf'ah Standard No. (31): Controls on Gharar in Financial Transactions





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard covers the impact of excessive, medium  and minor Gharar on transactions  performed by Islamic financial institutions  (Institution/
Institutions). In this  respect  the  standard will set out  the  Shari'ah
rulings  pertaining   to  the  case when  Gharar  is involved  in  exchange• based  contracts/commutative   contracts  ('Uqud al-Muawadat)  including partnerships, and the case when Gharar is involved in donation contracts/ non-commutative contracts  ('Uqud al-Tabarru'at). The standard will also make special reference to the case when Gharar is involved in a contract's condition.

2. Definition and Types of Gharar

2/1  Gharar  is a state of uncertainty that exists when the process of con• cluding a transaction involves an unknown  aspect. In other words, Gharar refers to the status of results that may or may not materialize.

2/2  Degree-wise, Gharar can be excessive, medium  or minor. As regards its effect on the transaction, Gharar can be to the extent which nullifies the contract or it may not be so.

3. Shari'ah Status of Gharar

It is impermissible in Shari'ah to conclude a contract or stipulate a condition that involves a degree of Gharar which could jeopardize the fulfillment  of the contracts stipulations. The degree of Gharar for this purpose is judged as per item (4) below.

4. Controls on Gharar Which Violates Transactions

Gharar violates the transaction when it satisfies the following four condi•
tions:

(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banlcs.



772





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions

a) If it is involved in an exchange-based contract or any contract of that nature.

b) If it is excessive in degree.

c) If it relates to the primary subject matter ofthe contract. d) If it is not justified by a Shari'ah-recognizable necessity.
4/1  First Condition: When Gharar is in an exchange-based  contract or a similar contract:
This includes, for instance, sale, lease and partnership contracts, whereas Gharar does not affect donation contracts such as gift and will contracts.

In an exchange-based contract Gharar can be either in the form or subject matter of the contract.

4/2  Second Condition: When Gharar is excessive

4/2/ l  Gharar is excessive when it becomes a dominating and distinctive aspect of the contract,  and is capable of leading to dispute. However, assessment of Gharar for such purpose could differ according to place and time, and has to be determined in the light ofnormal practice (Urf). Examples ofexcessive Gharar include selling of fruits before production, signing a lease contract for an unspecified period, and sale of a Salam commodity that is not usually available on date of delivery. Gharar in any of these forms sets the contract null and void.

4/2/2 Minor Gharar is the degree of Gharar that a contract could hardly avoid, and is not sufficient to generate dispute. This includes transactions like sale of a house to a buyer who has not seen its foundation, or leasing the house for one month while months differ in length. Such type of Gharar does not affect the contract.

4/2/3 Medium Gharar falls between excessive and minor and its ex• amples are: sale of underground commodities or commodities that cannot be known unless broken,  or leasing of fruit trees.



773





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions

Medium Gharar can also exist in contracts like Ju'alah (payment of a specific reward for a task if accomplished), guardianship, companies  and fixed-term Mudarabah. Medium  Gharar  does not affect the contract.

4/3  Third Condition:  When  Gharar relates to the primary  object of the contract

If Gharar relates to the primary subject matter  of the transaction,  it sets the contract  null and void, as when unripe  fruits are sold (apart from the trees and without  a stipulation  for awaiting harvesting).  If, instead, Gharar is in a corollary ( Tabi') of the primary  subject matter, it has  no  effect  on  the  contract.  The  example  here  is selling the unripe  fruits along with the trees, or selling the nonexistent part  of the plants along with the part that already exists. A further  example of Gharar in a corollary is a fetus sold along with the pregnant sheep, or milk in the udder of a sold sheep.

4/4  Fourth Condition: When no Shari'ah-recognizable need has neces•
sitated Gharar in the contract

Need in this context (which could be public or private)  refers to the situation when refraining from commitment ofimpermissible Gharar leads to severe hardship, though  may not amount to mortality. Need should also be inevitable; i e, there should be no permissible way of accomplishing  the  task, except through  the  contract  that  involves excessive Gharar.  Commercial  insurance, in the absence of Takaful (solidarity insurance)  can be cited here as a fitting example.

5. Scope of Gharar in Exchange-Based  Contracts ('Uqud al-Mu'awadat)

Gharar in this type of contracts  could be in the form, object or terms of the contract.

5/1  Excessive Gharar in the form of the contract

Gharar is said to be in the form of the contract when it relates to offer and acceptance rather than to the object ofthe contract. Practical types of such Gharar comprise the following:



774





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions

5/1/1  Combining two sales in one sale (Bayatayn Fi Bay'ah)

Combining two sales in one sale nullifies the contract, and the examples of that is selling a good for one thousand  pounds  in cash or two thousands on deferred payment, without concluding any of the two deals.

5/1/2 Sales in which the deal is finalized subject to random  selection of the sold object

Sales  become  void when  the  sold item  is randomly  selected. One example of such type of sale is Bay' al-Hasah (sale by stone throwing), in which the seller throws a stone and the buyer has to accept the item on which the stone falls. Another example is Bay' al-Munabadhah  (throwing of the sold commodity), where the seller throws to the buyer one of the commodities he wants to sell. Such sale could also be conducted by using a programmed machine to determine the sold good irrespective ofthe choices of the seller and the buyer.

5/2  Gharar in the object of the contract

5/2/1  Gharar  in sold or leased objects and the like

5/2/1/1    Gharar which results from ignorance of the essence of the sold commodity  nullifies the contract. This type of Gharar takes place when, for instance, a sale contract is concluded without indicating what the sold commodity is.  Ignorance  of the  essence  of the  sold  commodity would consequently result in ignorance of the type and characteristics of that commodity.

5/2/1/2   Gharar which stems from ignorance  of the type of the sold commodity  nullifies the contract, as when a car is sold without specifying its type, or when an amount of currency is sold (through a currency exchange contract) without indicating  the type of that currency  or having a generally accepted tradition  for its determination.



775





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions

5/2/1/3   Gharar which results from lack of knowledge of the sold commodity in particular (non-specification ofthe commodity) nullifies the contract. The example of this is sale of a non-specified car from a number of cars in a car showroom, or sale ofa piece ofland in a residential area without the option of specification.

5/2/1/4   Gharar due to ignorance ofthe specific characteristics of the sold commodity  (for commodities  that usually differ in nature)  nullifies the contract.  This happens when  a nonexistent  commodity  is sold without  de• scribing it.

5/2/1/5  Gharar  due to ignorance  of the amount  of the sold commodity, such as Bay' al-Juzaf(sale of an unknown quantity),  nullifies  the  contract, except  when  there exist the conditions that make Gharar forgivable. Such conditions include: viewing the sold commodity at the time of sale, or when estimation is possible in the case ofthe commodity in question, or ifwhat really matters for that specific commodity is the quantity as a whole rather than the individual components. In such cases, Gharar does not nullify the contract.

5/2/2 Gharar in the price or rent of the contract's object

Gharar  could arise when, for instance, a commodity  is sold without mentioning  the price, or when the price is left to be determined  by one of the two parties of the contract,  or by a third party. Another  example here is the case of somebody purchasing a commodity for an amount ofmoney in a bundle or in his pocket. A third example is purchasing the commodity by using a currency which the buyer ignores its issuer and has no indication that could help him to know it. In all these cases, Gharar nullifies the sale contract.

However, there are some cases where Gharar in the price is permitted, as - for instance - when the sale contract is concluded



776





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions

at the market price on the day ofpurchase, or at the price to be set by the market on the day of purchase, or at the price people usually sell at

Sale with forgivable Gharar in price could also include purchasing commodities through Bay' al- Istjrar, in which the buyer obtains the goods regularly from the seller for a price to be determined subject to the price that  people normally sell at, or subject to an index, and even after consumption of the goods in question.

A similar sale contract is that which comprises selling, at unit price, of a quantity of the commodity which the buyer can see, yet does not know its exact amount or total value. That is to say, one could sell a quantity of grains at the price per kilogram, or he could rent a car at a rent per mile, so that the payable amount of rent is determined after reaching the target destination.

Furthermore, such sales may include concluding a lease contract at the rent normally paid for similar property, or for a variable rent to be indicated by a specialized index.

In all these preceding cases, the contract does not become null and void.

5/3  Gharar relating to ignorance of the contract's period

5/3/1 The contract becomes null and void when its duration  is not stipulated. If, however, Gharar is removed by knowledge ofthe contract's  duration, or abandonment of the duration, at the time of contracting, the contract becomes valid.

5/3/2 Gharar  can be forgiven in postponement of the price until known seasons such as season ofharvesting. In this case, the two parties  should  observe  the normal  date  of the  season rather than the event of harvesting.

5/4 Gharar pertaining to failure in delivery

Gharar which relates to failure in delivery nullifies the contract. Ex•
amples of such Gharar include selling offish in the water, unless it is



777





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions

found in a confined place and does not require fishing. Such type of Gharar can also be seen in the sale (without option) of a commodity to be imported  from abroad, and one is not sure whether  a license for its importation would be obtained  or not.

5/5  Gharar relating to sale of non-owned commodities

Gharar  relating to sale of a non-owned commodity nullifies the sale contract. It refers to the case when  the seller does not  (personally) have the  commodity at the  time  of signing  the  contract,  and  has to purchase  it from the market. Salam and Istisna'a are exceptional cases here (subject to their respective conditions).

5/6 Gharar that results from sale of non-held commodities

A person  shall not sell a commodity (whether it is a real estate or movable property) that he does not guarantee through  actual or con• structive holding. In the absence of actual or constructive  holding, it will not be possible to determine the party that possesses (and hence guarantee)  the sold object. Therefore, selling a commodity that one does not own nullifies the sale contract.
Actual holding  in this context refers to receiving the good in hand, or receipt  of the  exact  quantity  in case of commodities  measured in terms of volume or so.  If the deal in question  pertains  to a Juzaf
commodity (a commodity of an unknown quantity) holding would require  shifting the commodity to another  location. Holding  in all cases, other than  the preceding  ones, shall be judged  as per normal practice.

As regards constructive  holding, it indicates the act of releasing the commodity and facilitating the process of its holding.

5/7  Gharar resulting from sale of nonexistent  commodities

It is impermissible to sell a commodity that neither existents at present, nor does its existence in the future is ensured. Mu'awamah  sale (sale of fruits to be delivered over several years) is a good example of such transactions.



778





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions

5/8  Gharar which results from lack of viewing  the sold commodity
(Bay' al-Ayn al-Gha 'ibah)

5/8/1 It is impermissible to sell a commodity without enabling the buyer to view it or obtain its full description.  Nevertheless, a commodity  can be sold on the basis of mere description, whether  description  is to be made by the seller or someone else.  Description   should  include  all those  characteristics which could affect the price. The buyer should then conclude the deal if the commodity  is exactly as described, otherwise he is free to conclude the deal or not.

5/8/2 It is permissible to sell an asset that the buyer has seen sometime before the time of signing the contract, provided that the asset has undergone no change since that time.

5/8/3 A sale can be concluded on the basis of a model that indicates the characteristics of the sold commodity.

6. Impact of Gharar on Documentation Contracts

6/1  Impact of Gharar on Rahn (Mortgage) contracts

Rahn (Mortgage) can permissibly involve a degree of Gharar that is not allowed in sale. For instance, a lost car or a farm that has not yet reached the stage ofgiving yield can be the object of a mortgage contract. Nonetheless, such property cannot be sold for settlement ofthe debt, unless the lost car is found or the farm has reached the stage of giving yield.  [see Shari'ah Standard No. (5) on Guarantees]

6/2  Impact of Gharar on suretyship (Kafalah) contracts

Suretyship  (Kafalah) can also involve a degree of Gharar that is not permitted in sale. Suretyship can be conditional (provided that the condition does not contradict with the stipulations ofthe contract); or it can be for an unknown period; or it may relate to a future obligation. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (5) on Guarantees]

6/3  Impact of Gharar on agency (Wakalah) contracts

Agency (Wakalah) is permissible with Gharar, if there are indications or traditions that can be used for specifying its subject matter.  For



779





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions

instance, agency can be conditional, or its subject matter can be identified through  some of its forms. This shall, however, hold true when agency is free of charge, otherwise it shall be treated like Ijarah (hiring) and, thus, affected by Gharar. It is also permissible to make general agency contracts. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (23) on Agency and the Act of an Uncommissioned  Agent (Fodooli)]

7. Impact of Gharar Which Stems from the Conditions of the Contract

The condition  which results in Gharar  in the form or subject matter  of the contract:
A contract  becomes null and void if it contains  a condition  that causes Gharar  in  its form,  as when  it contains  an  option  without  time  limit. A contract can  also become  null  and void  for involving  Gharar  in  its subject matter, as in the case of "Bay' al-Thunya" which refers to partial sale of a property, while  retaining the  remaining  part  as an  exception (e.g., selling a multistory building with the exception of one floor without specifying it). Such sale is permissible  only  if the  retained part  of the property  is specified.

8. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 26 Sha'ban  1428 A.H., corresponding to 9
September 2007 A.D.























780





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah  Board adopted the Standard  on Controls  on Gharar in
Financial Transactions in  its meeting No.  (19)  held on 26-30 Sha'ban
1428 A.H.,  corresponding to 8-12 September 2007 A.D., in Makkah Al• Mukarramah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.











































781





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (14) held on 21-23 Rabi' I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 30 April - 2 May 2005 A.D.,  in Dubai (U.A.E.),  the Shari'ah Board decided to issue a Shari'ah Standard on Controls on Gharar in Financial Transactions.

On 20 Jumada II, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 26 July 2005 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee decided to commission a consultant to pre• pare a study on Controls on Gharar in Financial Transactions.

The study was discussed in a joint meeting of the Sharf'ah Standards
Committees (1) and (2), held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 8-9 Rabi' I,
1427 A.H., corresponding to 6-7 April 2006 A.D. The joint committee then advised the consultant to introduce the necessary changes in the Standard, in the light of the discussions and observations of the meeting.

The revised draft of the Standard was discussed in another joint meeting of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2), held in Al-Madinah Al• Munawarah, on 7-12 Jumadah I, 1427 A.H., corresponding to 3-8 June 2006
A.D. The consultant was again advised to introduce changes in the Standard as per the discussions and observations ofthe meeting.

In its meeting No. (17) held inMakkahAl-Mukarramah, on27 Shawwal
- 1  Dhul-Qa'dah 1427 A.H., corresponding to 18-23 November 2006 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the changes in the Standard which had been made by the joint meeting of Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2), and introduced changes that it deemed necessary.

The Secretarial General ofAAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 18 Safar  1428 A.H., corresponding to 8 March 2007 A.D.



782





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions

More than 30 participants attended the session as representatives of central banks, institutions, and accounting firms. The session was also attended by Shari'ah scholars, university teachers and other interested parties. Several observations were made in the  session, and duly responded  to by the members of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2).

In its meeting No.  (19) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah  during 26
Sha'ban - 1  Ramadan 1428 A.H., corresponding to 8-12 September 2007
A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed the amendments that had been suggested in the public hearing, introduced changes that it deemed necessary and adopted the Standard.









































783





Sharf'ah Standard No. (31): Controls on Gharar in Financial Transactions





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


■  Gharar is divided into excessive, medium  and minor, because there is a degree of Gharar which contracts  could hardly avoid, whereas there is an excessive degree of Gharar  that  could become  a distinguishing aspect of the contract, such as Bay' al-Gharar (aleatory sale). In order to specify the two extreme limits of Gharar (excessive and minor) there should be a midpoint of Gharar  (medium Gharar). Regarding controls on excessive Gharar, Abu Al-Walid Al-Baji said: "It is the  degree  of Gharar which becomes so dominant in the contract, that the contract is described in terms of it.
■  Prohibition of concluding a contract or making a condition that involves Gharar is based on the Hadith (Prophetic tradition)  which states: "The Prophet (peace be upon him) hasforbidden aleatory sale. AL-Nawawi said: "This Hadith is a great origin ofShari'ah injunctions on sales and covers an unlimited number of issues.
■  Assessing excessive Gharar in terms of the four conditions mentioned  in this Standard is justified as follows:
1. If Gharar is in an exchange-based contract: Involvement of Gharar in exchange-based  contracts  would lead to unlawful acquisition  of the wealth of other people, whereas it is not so in donation  contracts. No dispute would arise in the case ofdonation contracts, since the recipient ofthe donation would incur no loss.
2. IfGharar is excessive: This is due to the consensus ofthe Shari'ah scholars on the impact of excessive Gharar on contracts. They have derived this conclusion from cases in which, due to involvement of excessive Gharar, contracts have been nullified by Hadiths (Prophetic traditions).

(2) "AI-Muntaqa" by AI-Baji  [1: 41].
(3) Related by Muslim in his "Sahih" [3: 156] with comments by Al-Nawawi  et al; and used
by AI-Bukhari as a heading of a chapter in his "Sahi: "Umdat Al-Qari" [11: 264]. (4) AI-Nawawi comments, in "Muslim" [10: 156].



784





Sharf'ah Standard No. (31): Controls on Gharar in Financial Transactions

3) 1f Gharar is in the primary subject matter of the contract  rather than in a corollary: This is based on the Qa'idah (Fiqh Principle):  "What can be forgiven in corollaries is not so elsewhere'. [item (45) of Qwa'id Al-Majallah]
4) 1f it is not justified by a Shari'ah-recognizable  need: This is because Shari'ah has come for the sake of relieving people from hardship, as Allah, the Almighty, states:  {".and has not laid upon you in religion
any hardship}• This holds true whether the need is public or private,
as per the Fiqh Principle which states: "Need, whether public or private, enjoys the same status of necessity".  [ Qwa'id Al-Majallah, item (33)]
■  A contract which contains  Gharar  in its form is null and void because it will remain  unconcluded. Gharar  in this case tends to make finalization of the contract probable rather than definite. This has been derived from a number  of similar cases on which strict prohibiting texts are available, such as the types of sales referred to in the Standard as well as other cases indicated  in Fiqh sources."
■  The contract  is null and void when its subject matter  involves Gharar  in its kind, nature, type or characteristics, because Gharar  in these aspects is excessive and  there  are  Shari'ah  texts  which  prohibit   similar  sales. Moreover,  such  cases involve  a great  deal of Jahalah  (ignorance)  and, thus, may lead to dispute. Jahalah here cannot be resolved by offering the buyer the option of viewing for instance.
■  The basis for nullity of a contract  that involves Gharar  in the amount  of
its subject matter  is the consensus  of the Shari'ah scholars  on denial  of ignorance  of the amount, whether  of the commodity sold or the price. It is also because ignorance ofthe amount leads to dispute that hinders  deli• very and receipt. <7l Permissibility of the cases which satisfy the conditions mentioned in this Standard (5/2/1/5 and 5/2), is due to the fact that such conditions  make Gharar forgivable.

(5) [A1-Hajj (The Pilgrimage): 78].
(6) "BidayatAL-Majtahid" [2: 153]; "Fath AI-Qadir" [5: 196]; "AL-Mjmu" [9: 340]; "AI-Sharh
AL-Kabir" by Al-Dardir [3: 2]; "AI-Muqaddimat" by Ibn Rushd (The Grand Father)  [2:
221]; "AL-Maughni" [4: 207]; and "AL-Bahr AI-Zakhkhar" [2: 293]. (7) "Hashiyat Ibn Abidin" [4: 28]; and "AI-Bada 'tr" [5: 158].



785





Sharf'ah Standard No. (31): Controls on Gharar in Financial Transactions

■  Invalidity of the contract when its duration is unknown rests on the fact that it could generate dispute. Prohibition has been reported about a sale contract known as "Bay' Habal al-Habalah", which denotes a type of sale in which the price is postponed until the fetus of the camel is born and has given birth  to another  camel. The Qur'an has also indicated that indebtedness should have a specific duration: {"O you who believe! when you contract a debtfor afixed period, write it down}."
■  The nullity of the contract due to Gharar that relates to failure in delivery
can be justified in terms ofthe excessive degree ofGharar it involves. A sale contract is meant to safeguard the rights ofboth parties (the seller and the buyer). If, instead, the seller is to get the price, while the buyer is unable to get the sold object, this will violate the very objective of the contract.
■  impermissibility  of the act of someone selling what he does not own
stems from the Hadith which states: "The Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, hasforbidden peoplefrom selling things that they do not own.9
Prohibition ofselling non-possessed property is also due to the excessive Gharar that failure in delivery could comprise. Gharar relating to failure in delivery is, in fact, the reason behind prohibition of selling a property which the seller does not hold, even legally. This has been derived from a Hadith"in this connection. Moreover banning sale of non-possessed property comes under the Fiqh Principle which states: "Any property that neither existent at present nor does its existence in the future is ensured should not be sold".  In this regard also, many scholars have explicitly mentioned  that sale of nonexistent property falls under Bay' al-Gharar (aleatory sale).0
■  The Shari'ah basis of the details mentioned in this standard about sale of a nonexistent asset is the degree of Gharar involved therein.  Gharar in this type of sale can be avoided only if the asset in question is well des-

(8) [Al-Baqarah (The Cow): 282].
(9) Related by AI-Tirmidhi in "AI-Sunan" [1: 159].
(10) Related by Muslim in his "Sahih" (1529) in the following words "Ifyou purchasefood, do not sell it until you hold it".
(11)  "Nay! Al-Awtar" [5:  244];  "AI-Bahr AI-Zakhkhar"  [3:  381]; "Al-Majmu' Sharh AL• Muhadhdhab" [9: 258]; and "AL-Muhadhdhab" by AI-Shirazi.



786





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions

cribed;  otherwise absence of viewing may hinder the conclusion of the contract. The Hanafi scholars argue that the buyer should have the option ofviewing so that the risk of Gharar can be avoided
■  The ruling that Gharar does not affect Rahn contracts  is based on the
fact that the Rahn (Mortgage) contract is not meant in itself, since it is a corollary contract signed for documentation.
■  Similarly, the ruling that Gharar does not affect agency in the strict Sha• ri'ah sense is based on the same reasons mentioned in the case ofmortgage, besides the fact that agency is primarily based on donation.
■  Suretyship  is permissible with Gharar because suretyship is a corollary
contract based on delegation ofthe right ofdisposal. However, if suretyship is paid for, it becomes an exchange-based contract and, thus, affected by Gharar.
■  Nullity of a contract which involves Gharar in any of its conditions origi•
nates from what has been discussed above about aleatory contracts.


































787





Sharf'ah Standard  No.  (31): Controls  on Gharar in Financial Transactions





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Ghurur and Taghrir (Deception)

The  difference between Gharar, and  (Ghurur or Taghrir) is that  the latter results from a statement, or an act, or a position which  a person re• sort to for the sake of deceiving  others, whereas Gharar does not involve any deception.

Jahalah (Ignorance)

The difference  between Gharar  and Jahalah is that Jahalah refers to lack of knowledge  about  the details of something,  in spite of knowledge  about its occurrence. In this sense, Gharar  is more  comprehensive than  Jahalah. Therefore, all things that are unknown involve Gharar, whereas not all things that involve Gharar are unknown.

Qimar (Gambling), Murahanah (Betting) and Gharar

Gharar is similar to Qimar and Murahanah in that it entails a result which could be accomplished  or not. However,  Gharar  does not resemble  Qimar and Murahanah in constituting a means that each party  uses for acquiring money from the other party. Therefore, Qimar is more specific than Gharar, because not all Gharar is Qimar.

Definition of the Mudaf (Postponed)

Idafah  (postponement), refers to delay of the contract's  effectiveness  to a specific time in the future, and hence Idafah  does not involve uncertainty like Gharar.










788
























Shari'ah Standard No. (32)




Arbitration












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                             793
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................        794

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               794
2. Definition of Arbitration                                                                           794
3. Forms of Resorting to Arbitration and Arbitration Parties.            794
4. Permissibility of Arbitration                                                                     794
5. Shari'ah Status of Arbitration..................................................................       795
6. Basic Elements of Arbitration............................................................       795
7. Scope ofArbitration (What Should Be Resolved Through Arbitration
in Shari'ah).................................................................................................       795
8. Characteristics  and Appointment of the Arbitrator                        796
9. Arbitration Document.............................................................................        797
10. Methods of Judgment, Procedures and Proving in Arbitration.......       798
11. Issuance  of the Arbitration Verdict.................................................       799

12. Communication  and Validity of the Arbitration Decision...............       801
13. Implementation of the Verdict (the Form of Implementation),
or Its Revocation.....................................................................................       801
14. Arbitration Expenses and the Arbitrator's Fees...........................       802
15. Date of Issuance of the Standard.....................................................       802
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        803
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        804
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard.....................................       806
Appendix (c):  Definitions.............................................................................         807







791








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to define Arbitration and indicate its conditions and scope. It also discusses the Shari'ah status ofarbitrators, arbitration document and verdicts, methods of initiating and implementing arbitration, and how arbitration  is implemented  in Islamic financial institutions  (Institution/ Institutions).(I)






























(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



793





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard covers arbitration as practiced in financial transactions and other activities and relationships which take place among institutions, or between Institutions  and their clients or employees or other parties; whether inside or outside the host country ofthe institution.

2. Definition  of Arbitration

2/1  Arbitration is an agreement between two parties or more to designate an external  party  for resolving  a dispute  between  them  through issuance of a binding verdict.

2/2 Arbitration in this standard  refers to (Islamic Arbitration) which observes the rules and conditions  of Shari'ah.

3. Forms of Resorting to Arbitration and Arbitration Parties

3/1  Arbitration can be sought through  agreement of the two parties at the time of dispute, or in fulfillment ofa previous agreement between them to seek arbitration instead of resorting to law. Arbitration can also be legally imposed on the two parties.

3/2 Seeking Islamic arbitration should be stipulated in the agreements in which the two parties cannot be forced to resort to laws that contradict with Sharf'ah.

3/3  Arbitration parties are the two (or more) conflicting parties who seek arbitration.

4. Permissibility of Arbitration

Arbitration is permissible whether  it is sought by two natural  or legal persons, or by a natural person and a legal person.



794





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration

5. Shari'ah Status of Arbitration

5/1  Arbitration is binding in the following cases:

a) When it is stipulated as a condition in the contract

b) When the two parties agree on seeking arbitration on dispute, and pledge to observe its verdicts.

5/2  Arbitration  is not  binding  for an arbitrator  who  is not  entitled to remuneration. Such an arbitrator  can terminate  himself after accepting the task. If the arbitrator  is paid for his job, arbitration becomes  binding  for  him.  In  this  latter  case,  if the  arbitrator terminates  himself after accepting the  task, he should bear  any actual harm that may result from his act. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (34) on Hiring of Persons]

6. Basic Elements of Arbitration

6/1  The basic element ofarbitration is its form, which refers to the process of exchange of offer and acceptance between the two parties seeking arbitration, and the arbitrator.

6/2 Valid arbitration has to fulfill the following requirements:

6/2/1  Existence ofdispute between two parties or more, around a per•
missible right.

6/2/2 Agreement between the two parties on arbitration, and their mutual consent on accepting the verdicts of the arbitrator.

6/2/3 Acceptance of the arbitrator to do the arbitration task.

7. Scope of Arbitration  (What Should Be Resolved Through Arbitration
in Shari'ah)

7/1  Arbitration is permissible in whatever a party is entitled to relinquish his right in.

7/2 Arbitration is impermissible in the following cases:

7/2/1 What constitutes a right of Allah,  Glory be to Him,  such as
Hudud (Sharf'ah penalties).



795





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration

7/2/2  Cases that entail proving  or disproving  of a verdict that con•
cerns a third party.

7/3 When  the arbitrator issues a verdict  on an issue that  should  not be resolved through arbitration; his verdict is null and void.

8. Characteristics and Appointment of the Arbitrator

8/1  An Arbitrator shall have the full eligibility for performing his task.

8/2  In principle, an arbitrator shall be a Muslim. However, a non-Muslim arbitrator could be appointed when acute need so requires, in order to  arrive  at a Shari'ah-accepted verdict  (in  this  regard, item  11/1 below shall be observed).
8/3  It is permissible to appoint one arbitrator or more, and - preferably  • the number of arbitrators  is to be odd, otherwise, the two parties (the seekers of arbitration) may appoint  a chairman for the  arbitration panel,  whose  vote  shall be  the  casting  vote  when  other  votes are equal.

8/4 Each of the  dispute parties  may appoint  one arbitrator, and the ap• pointed  arbitrators may appoint  a final arbitrator  if they are permit• ted to do so by the disputing parties.

8/5  When  any of the two parties  refrains from appointing  an arbitrator from his own side as per the contract, the other party has the right to resort to the judiciary for appointing  an arbitrator to represent the refraining party, provided that the arbitration condition in the contract does not specify another way for appointing such arbitrator.

8/6 The arbitrator has no right to appoint an alternate arbitrator to replace him, without the permission  of the party that appointed him, because he has been  accepted as an arbitrator  in person. However, the arbi• trator  could have this right if arbitration  is assigned to an Institution or an arbitration  committee whose members  are appointed with due consideration for its declared conditions of selection.

8/7 An agent or a Mudarib does not have the right of accepting arbitration, except with the consent of the principal for the agent and the owners of



796





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration

the capital for the Mudarib, or on the basis ofa clause in the Mudarabah conditions such as conditions in investment accounts. No one should become part of the arbitration  on behalf of an institution that has a legal personality except its official representative.

9. Arbitration Document

9/1 The arbitration  document  originates from agreement  of the two parties ofthe dispute on arbitration, and acceptance ofthe arbitrator to perform  the task, and is called (the arbitration contract) or (the arbitration agreement).

9/2 The arbitration  document  should include the names  of the two parties of the dispute, the name of the arbitrator, the overall subject of dispute, the date specified for arbitration and the fees payable to the arbitrator if any.

9/3 The arbitration  condition  is the commitment  of the two parties of the arbitration  contract  or agreement to resolve their disputes through arbitration. Ifsuch condition is stipulated in any agreement or contract, there will remain no need for agreement on arbitration at the time of dispute.

9I4 The arbitrator should apply the rulings of Shari'ah. If he is obliged to apply a certain law, he should still not violate the rulings of Shari'ah.

9/5 The two parties  of the arbitration  have the right to impose  any permissible limitation on the arbitration so as to serve a permissible purpose  of their  own.  Permissible  limitations  may  include, for instance:  issuance of the verdict within  a specific time limit  or in view of a certain School of Fiqh or a certain law that does not contradict  the  Shari'ah; or consultation  with  exerts specified in name or by description. In the latter case, however, the arbitrator is not bound to accept the viewpoints of the experts.

9/6 When the period specified for arbitration expires without issuance of the verdict, the arbitrator becomes terminated, unless the two parties agree on extending the period.  The arbitration period starts at the



797





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration

time when the arbitration document has been signed by all the parties seeking  arbitration, and  ends  up at the time  when  the arbitration verdict has been signed by all these parties.

9/7 It is permissible to conclude  a verbal  arbitration  contract, however, Institutions should document the arbitration verdict in writing.

9/8 Acceptance ofarbitration  does not require attestation in the arbitration document, though such attestation is preferable.
10. Methods  of Judgment, Procedures and Proving in Arbitration

10/1  The arbitrator is free to use any legally accepted method ofjudgment, such as confession, evidence (attestation), oath taking, or refraining from  oath   (Nukul),  while  he  should   not  make  judgment  on the  basis  of his  own  opinion.  When  the  arbitrator  rejects  an attestation, his rejection  should not constitute  a reason for denial of that attestation in other  arbitrations or in the judiciary,  unless the same attestation is also rejected by the judiciary.

10/2  The arbitrator has the right to request all the documents  and proofs relating  to the  dispute,  or  copies of such  documents  verified  in comparison to originals. He has to show such documents to the two parties so as to seek their opinions on them. The arbitrator has also the right to request verbal or written statements from the two parties of the dispute or the witnesses, and to consult experts if needed.

10/3  The Arbitrator is neither  required  to follow the procedural rules of the judiciary, nor is he obliged to observe laws, unless such laws are part of public order.

10/4The arbitrator is not supposed to stick to the legally stipulated rules  of evidence. Instead, he has the  right  to make  use of any other evidence,  provided that  the  acceptance of that  evidence does not contradict with the rules of Shari'ah.

10/5  The arbitration  verdict  is issued by consensus or majority and in the case of equal votes the party  which includes the chairman  is considered to have the casting vote, unless some other arrangements are  proposed   in  the  arbitration  document  or  the  rules  of the arbitrating entity.



798





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration

11. Issuance of the Arbitration  Verdict

11/1  A valid arbitration decision should lead to a verdict that conform to the rules of Shari'ah.

11/2  The final arbitration decision should resolve all points of dispute and lead to fair specification ofthe rights ofthe arbitration parties. When  arbitration  ends up with partial resolution of the points of dispute, arbitration is incomplete since it has not enabled the disputing parties to avoid resorting to legal suing. In this case, the disputing parties have the right to demand a further decision from the arbitrator so as to resolve the remaining points of dispute.

11/3 Arbitration  should not go beyond the subject matter of dispute, because tackling ofany further issue does not fall within the man• date ofthe arbitrator, unless the two parties ofthe dispute agree to add it.

11/4 The arbitrator  has the right, subject to his own discretion or on request of the disputing parties,  to issue a commentary on the arbitration  decision, or introduce  corrections  for any material mistakes that might be involved therein.

11/5  The arbitrator can issue his decision in a number ofpreparatory or partial decisions, or identify the responsibility without estimating indemnification.

11/6 It is preferable that the Shari'ah or basis of the arbitration  de• cision be  mentioned  (reasoning),  yet this  does not  constitute a condition for valid arbitration, unless the law so requires.

11/7 In principle the arbitration  decision is to be issued in a session attended by the arbitrators if they are many (or most ofthem, after invitation). It can also be issued by circulation among members after being prepared by the final arbitrator, or the chairman ofthe arbitration  panel,  or any other authorized  member.  In the case of issuance by circulation, consensus among members should be reached.



799





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration

11/8 The arbitration decision is to be issued under the signature of all members ofthe arbitration panel (when they are many) including those  who raise objections  against it,  and  objecting  members should be allowed to state their objections on the document. The arbitration  decision may also be issued under  the signature of most ofthe members, after indicating the reasons that made some members refrain from signing. Nevertheless, the decision has to be issued at the knowledge of all members as per the minutes of the session convened for that purpose.

11/9 The arbitration decision includes: the text of the verdict; names, identities and addresses ofthe two parties ofthe dispute; reference to the date and number of the arbitration document; summary of the subject matter ofdispute; claims ofthe two parties ofthe dispute and the supporting  documents; names of witnesses and experts whose help was sought if any; names ofarbitrators, date and place of issuing the verdict; signatures of arbitrators; signatures of the parties of dispute if possible; and reasons of the decision reached unless the arbitration document comprises exemption from such reasoning and there is no legal condition to that effect.

11/10 The arbitration decision should not necessarily be issued in the presence of the two parties of the dispute, although it is better to be so for shortening the procedure of communicating it to them.

11/11 It would be better to include in the conclusion of the arbitration decision a request or a recommendation to the judiciary or the concerned legal authorities to use every permissible means for its implementation.

11/12 The arbitration  decision should not necessarily meet the consent of the  two parties  of the  dispute.  It  should  spontaneously  be binding to them, unless it is revoked for being counter to the rules of Shari'ah or public order.

11/12 The arbitration decision can be issued on the basis of reconciliation as prescribed by Sharf'ah or on the basis of consensual agreement.



800





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration

12. Communication and Validity of the Arbitration Decision

12/1  The arbitration decision shall be communicated to the two parties of the dispute through the normal procedures, unless a specific way of communication  is identified in the arbitration document or by any other legal authority.

12/2  The validity ofthe arbitration decision does not require attestation ofwitnesses on communication of the decision to the two parties of the dispute or the consent of these parties to it, although such attestation is recommendable for avoiding conflict.

12/3  The validity ofthe arbitration decision does not require its official registration or submission to the concerned court, yet this has to be done ifit is required for legitimizing the implementation of the decision. In that case, the date specified for finalization of such procedure should be observed.

12/4  If the arbitration decision is written in more than one language, the language to be adopted in case of dispute should be specified.

12/5  A signed copy of the arbitration  decision shall be handed  over to each of the two parties of the dispute, while each one of the arbitrators (if many) shall retain a signed copy as well.

13. Implementation of the Verdict (the Form of Implementation), or Its
Revocation

13/1  In principle, the two parties of the dispute should implement the arbitration verdict willingly. In case one party refrains from doing so, the other party has the right to present the verdict to judiciary for execution. Therefore, arbitration should not be resorted to if its verdict cannot be implemented.

13/2 For legitimizing the  execution  of the  arbitration  verdict,  it is permissible to approach courts that do not observe the rules of Shari'ah.

13/3  The arbitrator does not have the right to retreat from his verdict, unless when he declares that he has committed  a mistake in it.



801





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration

However,  in  case of committing a mistake, the  arbitrator can cancel or amend  his verdict  in view of the  rules  of the  Islamic Shari'ah and in the way that would ensure justice.

14. Arbitration  Expenses and the Arbitrator's Fees

14/1  It is permissible  for  the  arbitrator,  if he  is not  a volunteer  or a government employee designated for doing arbitration, to receive fees for the task. The amount  or percentage of such fees should be indicated  in the conditions  of arbitration  in case of Institutional arbitration,  or agreed upon in the arbitration document.

14/2  When the arbitration process leads to incurring of any expenses, such as transportation  expenses for the arbitrator, witnesses and experts, or typing expenses, or fees payable to the arbitrator, the arbitration decision must specify the party that should bear them.  It should be noted here that the expenses pertaining to the application of any of the disputing parties should be borne by that party alone, whereas common expenses are to be shared by the dispute parties, unless it is proved that one party has been deliberately intending to cause harm to the other through such expenses. In this latter case, the party that has been intending to cause harm  should bear such expenses. All these preceding points hold true in the absence of a prior agreement which assigns the payment of the expenses to a specific party or to the condemned party.

15. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 30 Shaban  1428 A.H., corresponding to
12 September  2007 A.D.















802





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted the Standard on Arbitration in its meeting
No. (19) held on 26-30 Sha'ban 1428 A.H., corresponding to 8-12 September
2007 A.D., in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.













































803





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 12 Rajah 1427 A.H., corresponding to 6 August 2006 A.D., the Shari'ah
Board decided to issue a standard on Arbitration.

On 21  Sha'ban  1427 A.H., corresponding to 14 September 2006 A.D., a joint meeting of the Shari'ah  Standards  Committees  (1)  and (2) was held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, and discussed the study. The meeting requested the consultant to introduce necessary amendments in the light of the discussions and observations of the joint committee members. The meeting discussed also the Standard on Arbitration which was ready in the same session, and introduced necessary changes in it, in the light of the discussions that took place.

In its meeting No. (17) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, on 27 Shawwal
- 1  Dhul-Qa'dah 1427 A.H., corresponding to 18-23 November 2006 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed the changes in the standard which had been made by the joint meeting of Sharf'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2), and introduced changes that it deemed necessary.

The Secretarial General of AAOIFI held a public hearing in the King•
dom of Bahrain on 18 Safar 1428 A.H., corresponding  to 8 March 2007
A.D. More than  30 participants  attended  the session as representatives of central banks,  institutions,  and accounting  firms.  The session was also attended  by Sharf'ah scholars, university teachers and other inter• ested parties. Several observations were made in the session, and duly responded to by the members of the Sharf'ah Standards Committees ( 1) and (2).



804





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration

In its meeting No. (19) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, on 26 Sha'ban
- 1  Ramadan 1428 A.H., corresponding to 8-12 September 2007 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the amendments that had been suggested in the public hearing, introduced changes that it deemed necessary and adopted the Standard.

















































805





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


■  In one sense, arbitration seems like agency on behalf of the two parties, although it also seems to involve private custodianship in another sense.
• According to Shari'ah arbitration could take place verbally, yet it is prefe• rable - for Institutions in particular - to document it in writing. In order to be legally accepted, arbitration needs to be written and signed by the arbitrators and the parties of the dispute.
In principle, selection of arbitrators should be subject to the same Sharf'ah
conditions for selection ofjudges including non-partiality. In case ofneces• sity, some of these conditions could be dropped such as the condition that the arbitrator should be a Muslim. Nevertheless, a non-Muslim arbitrator should not issue a verdict that contradicts with Sharf'ah.






























806





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (32): Arbitration





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Sulh (Reconciliation)

It refers to a request ofrelinquishment ofwhat the arbitrators consider to be the right of one ofthe two parties of the dispute. Such request shall not be made to a party who is an agent, unless he is delegated to do reconciliation. Preferably, the issuance of a reconciliation decision is to be based on a clear clause in the arbitration  document  indicating that arbitrators have the right to pursue reconciliation.

Consensual Settlement

It refers to the case when the two parties ofthe dispute agree, outside the arbitration  task, on a settlement  which  they both  accept, and request  the arbitrators  to issue a decision based on that settlement.  The arbitrators  in this case shall concur to the request of the two parties, unless the proposed settlement is impermissible,  or contrary  to public order.

Arbitration Document

It is a document  signed by the two parties to pursue arbitration  on a dis•
pute which has arisen between them.

Arbitration Agreement

It is a prior condition or a contract stipulating resort to arbitration  when dispute arises.

Material Mistakes

It refers to unintentional mistakes in names or numbers, when proofs or documents  indicate the aspects which need correction.

Institutional Arbitration

It is the selection of an Institution that comprises competent arbitrators to resolve the dispute. In this case, there is no need for designating the arbitrator in name.



807

























Shari'ah Standard No. (33)




Waqf












Contents


Subject                                                        Page

Preface                                                                                                             813
Statement ofthe Standard...................................................................         814

1. Scope of the Standard...........................................................................          814
2. Definition, Shari'ah Rulings, Rationale of Permissibility and Types ofWaqf....................................................................................................          814
3. Basic Elements ofWaqf                                                                            815

4.  Condition in Waqf.................................................................................          819
5. Supervision and Management ofWaqf                                                    820
6. Controls on Leasing ofWaqf Assets....................................................          823
7. Application of Modes of Investment for Development of Waqf
Income and Assets.................................................................................           824
8. Maintenance, Renovation and Replacement ofWaqf Assets...........           825
9. Istibdal (Exchange) ofWaqf Assets........................................................           826
10. Date of Issuance of the Standard..........................................................          827
Adoption of the Standard....................................................................          828
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard...........          829
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard..................................          831
Appendix (c):  Definitions...........................................................................          836
















811








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This standard aims at indicating the basic Shari'ah rulings on Waqf, which constitute the basis for practical application in this area. The standard also indicates the role of Islamic financial Institutions (Institution/Institutions) in supervision, management and investment ofWaqfproperties.































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



813




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This  standard presents  the  definition  of Waqf  and  discusses  its types, Shari'ah rulings, basic elements,  and the conditions  that pertain  to each of these elements. It also covers the conditions  required  in the Waqf and the  Waqif  (donor),  and  illustrates  the  appropriate   methods  for Waqf utilization, investment, supervision  and management. Furthermore, the standard covers the crucial role that Islamic financial Institutions could play in the development  of Waqf, and the appropriate  methods  of Waqf investment.

This standard, however, does not cover other philanthropic Institutions such  as Irsad  (allocation  of public  property for  public  utilities)  and financial trusts which resemble Waqf in some aspects.

2. Definition, Shari'ah Rulings, Rationale of Permissibility and Types of
Waqf

2/1  Definition ofWaqf

In Arabic language the word Waqf or Hahs means preventing some• thing from movement. In Shari'ah terminology, Waqf refers to making a property invulnerable to any disposition  that leads to transfer  of ownership, and donating the usufruct of that property to beneficia• ries.

2/2  Shari'ah status of Waqf

Waqf  is  permissible  in  Shari'ah,  as  has  been  emphasized  by  the Sunnah (Prophetic traditions) and Ijma (consensus ofFuqaha). Waqf is also a binding commitment,  and, therefore, declaring a property  as Waqf would  spontaneously deprive  its donating  owner the right of ownership.



814





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

2/3 Permissible types of Waqf

There  are  several types  Waqf  of which  most  important  is the charitable Waqf (al-Waqf al-Khayri), the family Waqf (al- Waaf al• Ahli),  the joint  Waqf (al-Waqf al-Mushtarak)  and  self-dedicated Waqf (al- Waqf 'Ala al-Nafs).

2/3/1 Waqf is said to be charitable when its income/usufruct is dedi•
cated for a charitable purpose.

2/3/2 A family Waqf is the Waqf in which the income/usufruct is reserved  for specifically  described  persons,  usually family members  and relatives. The income/usufruct of such Waqf goes to a charitable purpose when none of these persons is existent.

2/3/3 Joint Waqf refers to the case in which the property is donated to family as well as charitable purposes, and the income/usufruct here is shared accordingly.

2/3/4 In case of self-dedicated Waqf the donor retains the income/ usufruct  of the donated property  for himself as long as he is alive, and indicates the charitable purpose which shall be entitled to the income/usufruct of the Waqf after his death.

3. Basic Elements of Waqf

The basic elements of Waqf include: The form of donation, the Waqif
(the donor) and the donated property.

3/1  The form of the Waqf

3/1/1 The form of the Waqf comprises "offer" only, as it does not necessitate "acceptance': When a legally competent beneficiary rejects a Waqf that has been earmarked for him, his rejection has to be concurred to, yet the Waqf shall still remain valid. In this case the Waqf- or the share of the rejecting beneficiary if beneficiaries are many - should go to charitable purposes.

3/1/2 Formation of Waqf can take place verbally,  in writing,  or in any form of disposition which is normally considered as indi• cating it.



815




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

3/1/3 Waqf can be declared as effective starting from a future date, as when the donor declares his property to become Waqf starting from next year.

3/1/4 In principle  Waqf should be eternal. Nevertheless temporary Waqf  is also permissible when  the donor  desires to get back his property after a specific period.
3/2 The Waqif (donor)

3/2/1  The Waqif  can be a natural  or a legal person.  If the Waqif is a legal  person,   the  Waqf  decision   should  be  made  by  the general assembly and not the board  of directors.

3/2/2 The Waqifmust be legally eligible for disposing ofhis property.

3/2/3 The  Waqf  decision  of a person  whose  legal  competence is restricted because  of irrationality is invalid, except  when  he declares his property as Waqf for himself as long as he is alive. The  validity  of the  Waqf  decision  of a person  whose  legal competence  is  restricted because   of indebtedness  depends on confirmation by his creditors. When  the  creditors refrain from  confirming the Waqf  of the indebted person,  the Waqf becomes  invalid.

3/3  The beneficiary

3/3/1 The Waqf should  not be made for an impermissible purpose, although  it may not be for a charitable  purpose since the very beginning of its inception.

3/3/2 It is permissible to make Waqf for the benefit of non-Muslims, provided that the cause to be served  does not involve  a sin. It is also permissible  to make Waqf for the benefit  of the rich.

3/3/3  The Waqfbeneficiary need not be present at the time ofdeclaring theWaqf.

3/3/4 When the  beneficiary/beneficiaries of the  Waqf  is/are  no longer  existent, the benefits  of the Waqf should  go to charity purposes.



816





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

3/4 The Waqf property

3/4/1  The Waqf property  should fulfill the following conditions:

a) It shall be a Shari'ah-accepted property b) It shall be known
c) The Waqif shall be the sole owner of the property in which
nobody else should have a right of disposition  at the time of establishing the Waqf. If the Waqif himselfhas the option of disposing of the property, the Waqf shall become valid, and the option is spontaneously cancelled.

3/4/2 The Waqf has a legal personality  and financial liability which make it capable of giving and accepting commitment. The legal personality  of the Waqf is quite separate from the personality of its manager.

3/4/3 Types ofWaqf properties

3/4/3/1 Waqfis permissible in real estate along with permanent furniture and fittings.

3/4/3/1 Waqf is permissible  in movable  assets, whether  such movable assets are part of a real estate or independent.

3/4/3/2 Waqf is permissible  in money. The income  generated from utilization of the money is to be spent, while re• taining  the principal  amount.  Utilization may include, for instance, Shari'ah-based lending as well as permis• sible and  safe investments  like Mudarabah  where the profit share owned by the Waqf goes to beneficiaries.

3/4/3/4 Waqf is permissible  in  Sharf'ah-accepted  shares  and Sukuk. In this case, the income earned by these shares or  Sukuk  is to  be  spent  on  the  Waqf  beneficiaries. In case of liquidation the Shari'ah rulings  on Istibdal (exchange ofWaqf property) should be applied.

3/4/4 Waqf in common  property

3/4/4/1 Waqf can be a common property, whether such property is divisible or not. The whole common property  in this



817




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

case (not shares or Sukuk), can be leased and the Waqf gets its respective share ofthe rent.

Alternatively, the share of the Waqf in the common property  can be leased, so that the usufruct can be utilized through time-based and place-based Muhaya'h (succession), while  the  rental  income  goes to  the beneficiaries of the Waqf.

3/4/4/2 When the Waqfsuperintendent or the Waqfpartner asks for the division of an indivisible Waqf, the refraining party should be forced to accept selling. The income obtained from selling the Waqf in this manner should be used for purchasing a Waqf property of the same kind.

Ifsuch request for division is made in case ofa divisible Waqf, the refraining party should be forced to accept division.

3/4/5 Waqf as a floor in a building, and easement eights (Irtifaq or
Ta'alli)

Waqf can be a floor in a building. It can also enjoy easement rights  (Haqq  al-Irtifaq)  in a building  that has not yet been constructed. In this case the Waqf can enjoy the right of Ta'alli (transcendence) when the upper floor is declared as Waqfwhile the owner ofthe lower floor is unable to perform construction. The lower floor in such case can be built at the cost ofthe Waqf (on permission  of the  concerned  authorities)  and the  cost reimbursed  to the Waqf from the income generated through its leasing.

3/4/6 Waqf as a usufructs

Waqf can be a usufruct  of an asset which the Waqif acquires through rent. The Waqif can lease the asset once again, and the proceeds go to the Waqfbeneficiaries. The Waqf, in this case, is to be made temporary according to the period of the original



818





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

rent. Waqf can take place in this manner when the owner of the property does not deprive the lessee the right of subleasing.
4. Condition  in Waqf

4/1  Conditions pertainin g to the Waqf contract

4/1/1 The Waqifhas the right to make his Waqf subject to all condi• tions which do not contradict with Sharf'ah, and his conditions shall be as enforceable as Shari'ah conditions. The conditions of every Waqif must be understood with due consideration  to the prevailing norms in his environment.  Such conditions may in• clude, for example, designating a certain superintendent for the Waqf and specifying his remuneration  package. The designated superintendent could be an individual,  a group  of people, or an institution.

4/1/2  Regarding the form ofthe Waqf, the Waqifcan make a condition that his debts should be settled from the Waqf income; after his death,  or he may stipulate a condition  that the income of his Waqf should go to him first as long as he is alive, then  to his family, and finally to charitable purposes. Another condition of the Waqif could be that the Waqf income has to be spent first on any member  of his family who becomes poor, and then on charity purposes.

4/1/3 A condition stipulated by the Waqif is invalid when it comprises an impermissible element, or when itviolates the Sharf'ah rulings on Waqf or cause harm to the Waqf property. In such cases the condition  should be rejected and the Waqf shall remain valid. Examples of invalid conditions include: absolute forbiddance of Istibdal (exchange) of the Waqf, or forbiddance of the dismissal of the Waqf superintendent for any reason.

A condition  stipulated by the Waqif also becomes invalid when it tends to hinder  the interests  of the Waqf, or jeopardize  the process ofbenefiting from it. The example ofthis is a condition which requires starting- at all times - with distribution of the



819




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

Waqf income among the beneficiaries, even if the Waqf is in need of maintenance or renovation.

4/1/4 When the Waqifstipulates a condition that the Waqfshould be benefited from through  residence, the Waqf can be benefited from either in that manner, or through leasing, and vice versa

5. Supervision and Management of Waqf

5/1  Controls on supervision  and management of Waqf

Supervision and management ofWaqfshould observe the Sharf'ah rulings  on Waqf, then  the conditions of the Waqif which  do not contradict with  Shari'ah or hinder the  interests  of the  Waqf  as perceived by the judiciary.

5/2  Tasks of the Waqf superintendent

The WaqfSuperintendent should perform the following tasks, among others:

5/2/1 Management, maintenance  and development ofthe Waqf.

5/2/2 Leasing of the assets or usufructs of the Waqf (through oper- ating-lease contracts), and leasing ofthe Waqflands.

5/2/3 Development ofthe Waqfproperties either directly in Sharf'ah• sanctioned methods ofinvestment, or through Islamic financial institutions.

5/2/4 Increasing the Waqfmoney by investing it through Mudarabah and other similar forms.

5/2/5 Changing  the operational  form of the Waqf assets with the aim of maximizing  the benefit that results to the Waqf and its beneficiaries.  This may include,  for instance,  converting a residential building into a commercial building, or construct• ing buildings for rent on an agricultural land, provided that this would satisfy the demand of the people, generate more income for the Waqf and is done with the permission of the concerned authorities.



820





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

5/2/6 Defending  the rights  of the Waqf,  ensuring  its sustainability, payment  of fees to agents in case of law suits filed against the Waqf,  and  payment   of expenses  for  documentation  of the assets and the rights of the Waqf.

5/2/7 Settlement of the debts of the Waqf.

5/2/8 Payment of the entitlements  of beneficiaries

5/2/9 Replacement of the Waqf either by selling it for a cash amount and purchasing  a new asset, or exchanging it with a new asset, subject to the conditions  of Istibdal (exchange). [see item 9]

5/2/10  Safeguarding the Waqf properties against occupation or seizure by others.

5/2/11  Using solidarity insurance to safeguard the Waqfassets, whenever possible.

5/2/12  Preparation of the Waqf accounts, and submission of statements and reports on them to the concerned authorities.

5/3  What shall not be done by the Waqf Superintendent

The Waqf superintendent shall not do the following:

5/3/1  Neglecting the conditions  of the Waqif.

5/3/2 Leasing the Waqf to himself or to one of his dependant  sons • even if such leasing is at more than  the normal  rent - except through  the judiciary. He should not also lease the Waqf to one of his direct relatives (Usul and Frua') or to his spouse, for less than  the normal  rent of similar property. In this case, minor injustice (Ghabn) is not forgivable, although  it is forgivable in leasing to nonrelatives.

5/3/3 Using the  Waqf income  for increasing  the  Waqf properties, except when this is done in fulfillm ent ofa condition stipulated by the Waqif.

5/3/4 Mortgaging the Waqf assets for a debt to be obtained  for the
Waqf or the beneficiaries.



821




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

5/3/5 Lending the Waqf assets, and if he does so, the borrower has to pay the normal rent for similar assets.

5/3/6 Borrowing for the Waqf, except in fulfillment of a condition stipulated by the Waqif, or on permission ofthe legal authorities, and in case ofnecessity. In borrowing for the Waqfthe following should be observed:

5/3/6/1 Establishing a debt obligation on the Waqf is pennis• sible through  permissible  means  of borrowing,  or deferred payment purchase, or any other permissible mode of financing. Establishing the debt through any of these modes has to be for the sake of maintaining and developing the Waqf, as per a condition stipulated by the Waqif, or on permission  of the legal authori• ties, and due to necessity. In establishing the debt, due consideration shall also be given to the ability of the Waqf to bear such debt and sufficiency of its income for repayment. These restricted forms of establishing debt obligations on the Waqf do not include the case when the Waqf superintendent  pays a certain amount of money from his own sources for an interest which concerns the Waqf, and the Waqf has sufficient in• come to be resorted to for settlement of such debt.

5/3/6/2 Cases which justify borrowing  for the Waqf, when borrowing is not sanctioned by a condition stipulated by the Waqif:
a) Need for maintenance or necessary development of the Waqfand absence ofsufficient Waqfincome for that.
b) Payment offmancial commitments -- if any - when the Waqf does not have sufficient funds.
c) Inability to pay the wages ofthe employees working in the Waqf or those who serve its purposes, and fear from endangering the benefits of the Waqf.



822





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

5/3/6/3 Borrowing should not be for the sake of spending on the beneficiaries of the Waqf.

5/4 Spending the excess income of the Waqf of a mosque

In principle the income of the Waqf of a specific mosque is to be spent on its own interests. Ifthere is still an excess amount ofincome which has not been spent, it is permissible to transfer such amount to another mosque that does not have enough income to cover its expenses, or the cost of its maintenance and renovation.

5/5  Judicial supervision on Waqf management

5/5/1  Byvirtue ofpublic guardianship, the judiciaryhas the authority of overseeing the supervision and management  of the Waqf, preservation of its assets, and development of its sources. The judiciary has also the right of investigating the overall status of the Waqf, looking into any complaints raised against the Waqf superintendent  or any other party, and subjecting the Waqf superintendent to disciplinary action.

6. Controls on Leasing of Waqf Assets

6/1 In principle, a long period  of leasing should not be the normal practice for Waqf assets, except for obvious interest, and provided that a variable rent, linked to an accurate and well known index, is going to be sought.  [see Shari'ah Standard No. (9) on Ijarah and Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek, item 5/2/3]

6/2  The normal rent of similar property as a condition

Waqf assets or usufructs should not be leased at less than the rent of similar property. When leasing at a lower rent is inevitable it should be considered in view of the actual necessity, and hence,  excessive injustice (Ghabn Fahish) can be accepted.  If there happen  to be a new tenant who can pay the rent of similar property, the Waqf superintendent  has the right to terminate the previous contract, unless the old tenant accepts the rent increment. If the normal rent for the Waqf in question has risen because of developing the Waqf



823




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

land and constructing a new building  on it at the cost of the Waqf, the tenant  is obliged to accept rent increment.  If land development and construction of the building is done at the cost of the tenant, he is not bound  to accept the rent increment.

6/3  Some permissible forms ofWaqfleasing

6/3/1  Signing a lease contract with the aim of keeping the Waqfland in the hands  of the tenant  as long as he pays the normal  rent for similar property  as it changes according to circumstances. This type of contract  is known  as (Hikr) and is subject to the following conditions:

6/3/1/1 The Waqfhas no income to be used for its development.

6/3/1/2 There  is no person  who  is willing to have fixed-term rent and make advance payment  so as to be spent on developing the Waqf.
6/3/1/3 Istibdal (exchange) of the Waqf is not possible

6/3/2  Haqq al-Qarar  (right  to  stay)  which  a tenant  deserves when he pays at the time of signing the lease contract  a lump  sum amount, known  as (Kardar) for development of the Waqf,  and a rent which is below the rent of similar property. This form of Waqf leasing is permissible when  dictated by necessity, and if there is no tenant who is willing to pay the normal rent for similar property along with a lump sum amount for development of the Waqf. In some countries, this contractual form is known as (al• Khulu).

7. Application of Modes of Investment for Development of Waqf Income and Assets
7/1  It is permissible to invest Waqf income, in the following cases:

1-  As per a condition  stipulated  by the Waqif.

2- During the waiting period (prior to identification ofbeneficiaries).

3- Excess income, after payment  to beneficiaries.



824





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

Investment in these cases should be through permissible methods such as Mudarabah, Musharakah, Murabahah, Ijarah, and Salam, and in low risk investments.

7/2 For development of the Waqfland, the following is permissible:

7/2/1 Application  of the  Istisna'a through  B.O.T.  contracts.  [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (11) on Istisna'a and Parallel Istisna'a, item 3/2/1]

7/2/2 Application of diminishing Musharakah, where the Waqf and the financing partner  construct  the building through  joint financing (excluding the Waqf land), and the Waqf gradually owns the building. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (12) on Sharikah (Musharakh) and Modern Corporations, item 5/8]

7/2/3 Application of Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek for a specifically described propertyto be delivered in the future. In this case, the Waqf land is leased to the financier who constructs a building on it and delivers it to the Waqf to execute the lease contract At the end of the contracting period, the Waqf becomes the owner ofthe building. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (9) on Ijarah and Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek, item 3/5]

7/3 AIl appropriate means should be adopted for development ofAwqaf, with due consideration to Shari'ah rulings on Waqfand the conditions stipulated by the Waqifs, as well as present day requirements.

7/4 Help in this regard should be sought from Islamic financial institu•
tions, specialized in Waqf investments.

8. Maintenance, Renovation and Replacement ofWaqf Assets

8/1  Maintenance and renovation  of Waqf assets, and allocation  of reserves for that purpose

8/1/1 Spending on maintenance, reparation  and renovation of the Waqf assets should precede distribution  of the Waqf income among beneficiaries. In this connection, due consideration shall be given to the technical schedules ofperiodical maintenance.



825




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

Maintenance and reparation ofWaqf assets also do not require a prior condition to be stipulated by the Waqif.

8/1/2 Maintenance   and  renovation   requirements   (maintenance reserve) shall be retained from the Waqf income every year even if the Waqif has not stipulated such a condition. The reserve, thus deducted, can be invested in a safe and easy to liquidate form ofinvestment, and the returns be added to the principal  amount.  The beneficiaries shall have no right on the maintenance  reserve, unless part of it turns out to be in excess of actual needs.

8/1/3 In the absence of sufficient amounts  for maintenance  and renovation of a leased Waqf asset, the Waqf superintendent has the right to allow the tenant to make such maintenance and renovation,  against having the priority  to continue  as a tenant of the Waqf asset until getting full repayment of his debt.

8/1/4 Solidarity insurance shall be used for maintenance or renova•
tion of the Waqf assets.

8/2 Making allocations for replacement of Waqf assets

It is permissible to deduct from the Waqf income (after distribution to beneficiaries) periodical amounts commensurate to the economic lifetime ofthe depreciating Waqf assets, so as to use the accumulated amount for replacement ofthese assets (depreciation allowance).

9. Istibdal  (Exchange) ofWaqf Assets

9/1  Istibdal refers to the process ofselling the Waqf asset and purchasing a new one instead, so as to maximize the interest ofthe Waqf.

9/2 Istibdal can take place according to a condition  stipulated by the Waqif,  or when the Waqf becomes ruined  (even  if prevented  by the Waqif).  Istibdal,  in such cases, takes place by selling the Waqf property and purchasing a new one instead, so as to maintain the Waqf as it was before.



826





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

Istibdal is also permissible  when there is no way of benefiting  from the Waqf (e.g., the Waqfhas become in a deserted  area), or because of fear from seizure of the Waqf by others, or when benefiting  from the Waqfbecomes extremely difficult.
9/3 Istibdal should be subject to the following conditions:

9/3/1  The Waqf must have reached the stage of generating no income, while there is no money for its development.

9/3/2 There should be no excessive injustice in the sale price.

9/3/3 Istibdal should meet the satisfaction and interest of the Waqf.

9/3/4 Istibdal should be permitted by the judiciary.

9/3/5  If the Waqf is a real estate it should also be exchanged for a real estate. When there is no risk of misuse, a real estate Waqf can be sold for cash, and the money kept with the judiciary until a new real estate is purchased.

1 O. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 28 Jumada II, 1429 A.H., corresponding to
2 July 2008 A.D.


























827




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted the Standard on Waqf in its meeting No. (21) held on 24-28 Jumada II,  1429 A.H., corresponding to 28 June - 2
July 2008 A.D., in  Dar Al-Taqwa Hotel, Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.











































828





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 5 Rabi' I, 1427 A.H., corresponding to 4 April 2006 A.D., the Secretariat General decided to assign to a Shari'ah consultant the preparation of a study on Waqf.

On 8-9 Rabi' I, 1427 A.H., corresponding to 6-7 April 2006 A.D., a joint meeting of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) was held in Makkah AI-Mukarramah, and discussed the study. The meeting requested the  consultant to introduce  necessary amendments  in the  light of the discussions and observations of the joint committee members.

On  19  Shawwal  1427  A.H.,  corresponding  to  10  November  2006
A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee  (2) held a meeting in Manama (Kingdom ofBahrain) in which it discussed the draft ofthe standard and requested the consultant to introduce necessary amendments in the light of the discussions and observations of the meeting.

In its meeting No. (17) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 26 Shawwal
- 1  Dhul-Qa'dah 1427 A.H., corresponding to 18-23 November 2006 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed the changes in the Standard which had been made by the joint meeting of Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2), and introduced changes that it deemed necessary.

The Secretarial General ofAAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 18  Safar  1428  A.H.,  corresponding to 8 March 2007 A.D. More than 30 participants attended the session as representatives of central banks, Institutions, and accounting firms. The session was also attended by Shari'ah scholars, university teachers and other interested parties. Several observations were made in the  session,  and  duly responded to by the members of the Sharf'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2).



829




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

In its meeting No. (19) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 26 Sha'ban
- 1  Ramadan 1428 A.H., corresponding to 8-12 September 2007 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the amendments that had been suggested in the public hearing, introduced changes that it deemed necessary and adopted the Standard.

















































830





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


The basis for considering Waqf (in principle) as a permissible and re• commendable practice (Mandub) is the Quranic Verses which instruct people to do good and spend on charitable causes, and also the Hadith (Prophetic tradition)  which indicates:  "When a person  dies his rightful deeds will stop except in three respects: An ongoing charity "Sadaqah Ja• riyah...". Waqf is considered to be the ongoing charity referred to in the Hadith, because the beneficiary does not own the Waqf asset, and accor• dingly, cannot dispose of it.
Moreover, there is the Hadith about the piece of land in Khybar which Umar donated as Waqf, when the Prophet (peace be upon him) advised him to do so.
Again, permissibility ofWaqfis supported by the practice ofthe Sahabah (Prophet's Companions)  like Uthman  and Abu Talhah, in addition  to Ijma' (consensus of Fuqaha). Waqf for charitable purposes  can also be justified through  Qiyas (analogical deduction)  in comparison  to Waqf for mosques.
Enforceability ofthe Waqfwhen it is indicated by a donor in his will, stems from the fact that according to Shari'ah a will should be executed, and its alteration or cancelation is strictly prohibited
• Family Waqf ( Waqfahli or Dhurri) is permissible on the basis of the Ha• dith about Umar's Waqf, and because family Waqf is, in fact, a charitable Waqf since it will finally become so.
■  Acceptance of the Waqf is not  a condition  for its validity when  the beneficiary is not specified, because acceptance cannot be expected in this case. In case of a specific beneficiary, acceptance can be obtained from him even if implicitly when he keeps silent. The ruling that when the beneficiary rejects the Waqfhis rights in the Waqf shall be dropped, whereas the Waqf should still remain valid, is based on the viewpoint of



831




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

the Hanafi School of fiqh. The justification here is that the beneficiary can drop his own rights in the Waqf, but he cannot nullify the Waqf itself.
■  Waqf inception can be subject to any form of disposition which traditio• nally indicates it, because traditions are usually recognizable, when they do not contradict with Sharf'ah rulings.
■  Permissibility of temporary Waqfis based on the viewpoints ofthe Maliki and the Imami Schools of Fiqh, in addition to what has been reported about the viewpoint of Abu Yusuf of the Hanafi School. Such viewpoint is based on the fact that a temporary Waqf can also fulfill its charitable objectives and result in two benefits: one of them is the benefit generated from Waqf throughout  its specified period, and the other is the benefit to the Waqif since he may need his property  in the future. Moreover, permissibility  of temporary  Waqf  could  encourage  Waqf  practicing, and, hence, contribute to fulfillment of the present need for charitable institutions.
■  Permissibility of declaring Waqf as effective starting from a future date
can be viewed in terms of analogy between Waqf and Wasiyyah (will).
■  The ruling that the Waqif should have full legal competence is based on the fact that Waqf in its very essence is a donation (Tabarruw), and there• fore, the Waqif should have full legal competence.
■  Prohibition ofWaqfby a person who is legally restricted for irrationality,
aims at safeguarding his creditors, his own self, and his dependants. There is no harm, however, when the irrational person declares the Waqf for himself. As regards the Waqf by a person who is suffering a fatal illness, it should be subject to the rulings applicable to the will of such person.
■  Permissibility of retreating from Waqf, unless it is a mosque, is the Ha• dith that has been narrated by Abdullah Ibn Umar and Umar's Hadith, as well as Qiyas (analogical deduction) to 'Ariyah (a lent thing).
■ The basis ofthe ruling that Waqfshould not be for an impermissible purpose while it can be for non-charitable purposes, is that Waqf is a donation (Tabarru'), and therefore, the only Shari'ah condition to be observed in it is permissibility ofthe purpose for which the donation is made. This viewpoint belongs to the Maliki School, whereas the Hanafi School is of the opinion that the Waqf purpose should be charitable.



832





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

■  The ruling that Waqf can be made for a person who is nonexistent  at the time  of establishing the  Waqf, is based  on the  Hadiths  narrated about Waqf for progeny, and  on the fact that Waqf is an ongoing  charity and therefore it should include those who will exist in the future.
■  Waqf is said to have a legal personality and financial liability which are quite
independent  from those of its superintendent, because Waqf can give and take commitments. When, for instance, the Waqf superintendent borrows money for the Waqf, the debt obligation does not fall on him but rather on the Waqf itself. Similarly, when the beneficiary fails to fulfill his obligation towards the Waqf, he becomes indebted  to the Waqf, rather  than  to the Waqf superintendent.  Therefore, in this case, the Waqf superintendent has no right to relief the debtor from the debt.
■  The ruling that Waqf donation should not exceed one third of the donor's wealth, is based on the analogy between Waqf and Wasiyyah (will), where part  of the wealth should  be left to the  inheritors  of the  deceased  (the obligatory entitlement as per Shari'ah). This has been explicitly referred to in the Egyptian Law of Awqaf.
■  Permissibility of making Waqf in the form of moveable property, regardless of its nature  and even if such property  is not survivable, is based on the ruling practice during the era of the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) and the orthodox caliphs with respect to making Waqfs for mosques. The majority  of Fiqh scholars also support  this viewpoint; whereas  the Hanafi scholars hold that Waqf of moveable property  is permissible only when it is the normal practice.
■  Money can be donated as a Waqfbecause this is the original form of Waqf,
as emphasized by Muhammad  Ibn Abdullah Al-Ansari the companion  of Imam  Zafar  and  supported  by Ibn Taymiyyah. Shares and Sukuk come under this type of Waqf.
■  A usufruct  can be donated  as Waqf, because  it is wealth,  and hence  it should be subject to the general rules ofWaqf. The fact that a usufruct  is temporary does not affect this ruling  since Waqf can also be temporary as has been indicated earlier.
■  The  ruling  that  permissible  conditions  of the  Waqif  shall be observed
(including  the  ten  conditions),   is based  on  the  Hadith  which  states:



833




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

"Muslims  are bound to the conditions they make".  In the last part of it, this Hadith implies that the donor's condition which has to be observed should not be in contradiction with the Sharf'ah "..except a condition that permits what has been prohibited or prohibits what has been permitted (by Shariah)."
■  The basis for appointing a superintendent for the Waqf is the Hadith which indicates that:  "There is no misdemeanor (Junah) on the one who is in charge ofit", and because interest necessitates the presence of someone who takes care of the investments  of the Waqf assets, collection of the Waqf's income and distributing it among beneficiaries.
■  The Waqf superintendent has to observe the conditions ofthe Waqif be•
cause Waqf is a donation (Tabarruw),  and therefore, it can be subject to conditions according to Shari'ah. As regards observation of the rules of Sharf'ah, the reason is obvious.
■  The basis for depriving the Waqf superintendent  the right of leasing the Waqf to himself or his son (without resorting to legal authorities) is the fear from favoritism which is part of human nature, and therefore prohibition of such leasing arrangement would minimize the chance for neglecting the interest ofthe Waqf.
■  The ruling that a Waqfproperty shall not be lent is based on the fact that
lending the property will reduce the chances for its investment.
■  Borrowing for the Waqf is restricted to the case of acute need, and not allowed for spending on the beneficiaries, because borrowing is meant to safeguard the Waqf against the harm ofbeing useless, whereas refraining from payment to beneficiaries when there is no Waqf income does not involve such harm.
• Permissibility of combining Waqf resources is based on the fact that it could lead to the benefit of the Waqf,  and that all Waqf properties are devoted for the Sake of Allah,  Glory be to Him.  However,  appropriate allocation to the different  beneficiaries of the combined Waqf assets should be duly observed so as not to cause harm to such beneficiaries. The General Council ofFatwa ofKuwait issued a Fatwa (Shari'ah opinion) permitting  transference  of the  excess income  of a mosque  to other mosques.
■  The condition pertaining to the need for judiciary supervision on the Waqf is based on the desire to ensure the achievement of the interests of the



834





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

stakeholders, and perform the role of Hisbah (a Shari'ah regulatory body). The  first person  who  arranged  judiciary  supervision  on  the  Waqf was Tawbah Ibn Namir, the judge of Egypt in the early Islamic era.
■  The ruling that Waqf assets should not be leased for less than the normal rent of similar assets (while minor injustice could be accepted) is based on the desire to avoid favoritism and waste of Waqf income. This viewpoint enjoys  unanimous   agreement  of Muslim  Fiqh  scholars.  The viewpoint regarding  termination   of the  contract  when  the  normal  rent  of similar property  increases and the Waqf tenant refuses rent increment belongs to the Hanafi School, contrary to the Maliki and Shafi'i Schools who hold that the contract should not be terminated  if the lease contract is for a specific period.
• Permissibility  of the forms of Waqf leasing which have been indicated  in Fiqh references is based on the desire to preserve the interests of the Waqf as well as the interests  of all its tenants,  without  causing injustice  to any party or neglecting the interest of the Waqf property.
• Permissibility of application of modern  financing techniques  which have been  developed  by Institutions  rests on the  fact that  such forms are in conformity with  the  usual  forms  of land  leasing  and  cultivation.  Such modern   forms  could  even  generate  more  income  than  the  traditional ones, and achieve the goals ofpreservation and security ofthe Waqf assets.
• Permissibility of making a reserve fund for maintenance and renovation of the Waqf is based on the desire to preserve  the Waqf assets and their ability to generate income, as has been emphasized  by a number  of Fiqh scholars.
• Istibdal (exchange  of the Waqf asset) is permissible  because  it achieves
the interest  of the Waqf, through its development  and maximization of its income.













835




Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Waqf

Making  a property   invulnerable  to  any disposition,  and  donating  its income  for charitable  causes. The term  Waqf is also used to describe the property  donated in this manner.

Waqf Ahli (Family Waqf)

The income  of the donated  assets or usufructs  goes in this case to the Waqif himself, his children, a certain number  of people, or a specific entity, for a specific period
Waqf Khayri (Charitable Waqf)

The income of the donated assets or usufructs goes to charitable purposes without specifying a certain entity or a specific group ofpeople as beneficiaries. The Waqf could be eternal or temporary.
Waqf Assets

The property used for generating income, while it cannot be disposed of.

Hiler or Tahkir

A lease contract according to which the Waqfland is kept in the hands of the tenant to build on it or cultivate it as long as he pays the normal rent for such property. Hikr or Tahkir can also take place through utilization of the Waqf land by leasing it for a specific purpose without specifying the period, and thus,  the tenant  obtains the right to stay,  subject to a valid contract. A third  form of Hikr or  Tahkir can take place implicitly when  the land is leased for a specific period, and then the tenant build on it or cultivate it after obtaining the permission  for that. In this latter case, when the lease period expires, and the tenant wishes to stay and pay the rent equivalent to that of similar property, he can be allowed to do so, in order not to cause harm  to



836





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (33): Waqf

him. Hikr or Tahkir is an alternative to Istibdal (exchange ofthe Waqfland), when the latter is not possible. These two methods constitute a financial right which cannot be inherited.

Irsad or Takhsis (Allocation)

Irsad refers to the case when the government authorities allocate a pub• licly owned piece of land for public utilities such as schools, hospitals and charitable activities. This is not considered as Waqf because, in this case, the land is allocated by someone who does not own it.

Haq Al-Qrar (Right to Stay)

Preference right to build on or cultivate the Waqf land. A certain type of this contractual arrangement is sometimes  known  as Kadak, and is applicable to leasing of shops and factories.





































837

























Shari'ah Standard No. (34)



Hiring of Persons












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                             843
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................        844

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               844
2. Definition of the Term "Hiring of Persons"...............................................       844
3. Pledge to Hire a Service..........................................................................       844
4. Concluding a Contract for Hiring of Persons.......................................       845
5. Subject Matter of Hiring Contract.........................................................       847
6. Guarantees for Provision ofthe Pay and the Service...........................       850
7. Commitments of the Employee and the Employer..............................       851
8. Emergencies, Termination, Expiry and Renewal of Hiring Contracts..       852
9. Date oflssuance of the Standard............................................................        853
Adoption ofthe Standard......................................................................        854
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        855
Appendix (b):  The Sharf'ah Basis for the Standard....................................        857






















841








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions




Preface


This Standard aims to indicate the Shari'ah rulings on hiring of persons in its two distinct forms which include: hiring in the sense of obtaining the services of a private employee (Ajir Khas), as well as hiring in the sense of obtaining the services of a shared employee (Ajir Mushtarak).  The service could also be either a defined task,  or a future service which needs to be specified through detailed terms of reference. The standard also covers the relevant controls that Islamic financial institutions (Institution/Institutions) should observe when the institution is the employee and when it is the employer.























(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



843





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard  covers hiring  of the service/work  of persons between  the institution  and other institutions  or individuals. The standard  covers the cases when  the institution  is the employee and when it is the employer. However, the standard does not cover other contracts such as Mudarabah, investment agency, Musaqat, Muzara'ah, Mugharasah, and Istisna'a.
2. Definition of the Term "Hiring of Persons"

It refers to the contract through which a service/work of a natural or a legal person is obtained against a specific amount  of pay. The service thus ob• tained could be specific or a future one that needs to be specified through detailed terms of reference,  such as educational, health  and consultancy services.
3. Pledge to Hire a Service

3/1  There is no Shari'ah prohibition against having a framework agreement to regulate the process of hiring between the institution and the client. Such  agreement  may comprise the general conditions which govern the  relationship  between  the  two parties,  whereas  there  should  be a separate hiring contract for each operation, signed by both parties. Under such framework agreement the two parties may also perform operations through exchange offer and acceptance with due reference to the general conditions stipulated in the agreement.

3/2 The institution has the right to ask the client who pledges to hire its services to pay a specific amount  to be retained by the institution as a guarantee  for the seriousness  of the client in executing his pledge and  honoring any commitments that  may  result  from  it. In case of withdrawal  from  the part  of the  client the  deduction  from  this guarantee  amount  should not exceed the actual harm  caused to the



844





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

institution. The guarantee amount  can either be kept as a deposit with the institution without being disposed of, or invested on behalf of the client through  Islamic Mudarabah  or investment  agency, or frozen in a current account owned by the client and guaranteed by the institution. The institution  and the client may also agree at the time of signing the contract  to consider the guarantee  amount  as a prepaid installment of the cost payable by the client.  [see Shari'ah Standard No.  (9) on Ijarah and Ijarah Muntahia  Bittamleek,  item
2/3]

4. Concluding a Contract for Hiring of Persons

4/1 A contract  for hiring  of persons  can take place in any form that normally  indicates  it. It can be concluded  verbally, in writing  or through  modern means of communication.

4/2 The two parties  of the contract  (the employer and the employee) should  be legally competent  (capable of awarding  and accepting agency), otherwise the contract cannot be concluded.

4/3 A private employee, who works for and under  the supervision  of a single employer, has no right to work, at the same time, for anyone else, except on permission of his former employer. Unlike a private employee a shared employee who works for more than one person and who is not supposed to work for a specific person at a specific time, is not subject to such restriction.

4/4 The private employee should be informed about the hiring period and the type of work he is supposed  to do in general, while the shared employee should be informed about the work, its type, and specifications. The specific period within which the work has to be done could also be added, and in that case the employee has to do the work within that specific period. When no specific period  for doing the work is referred to in the contract,  resort  should be to normal practice.

4/5 A private employee is not responsible for damage, unless it is due to his own transgression, negligence, or breach of a stipulated condition.



845





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

4/6  A shared employee is absolutely responsible for damage, unless it is caused by an evitable factor. This, however, does not hold true in the case of an investment agent who is permitted  to utilize the money. Unlike the shared employee who has to guarantee what he is paid to work on, the investment agent does not guarantee, except in case of transgression or negligence.

4/7  The contract for hiring of persons is a binding contract, which none of the two parties can terminate or amend without the consent of the other, except in case of contract breaching, or due to an emergent excuse, or because of inevitable circumstances.

4/8  For a private employee, the beginning of the hiring period should be specified. The hiring period should start at the time of signing the contract, except when the two parties agree on a specific date for its beginning. Hiring in the latter case is known as (deferred hiring), or hiring that has to be executed in the future.

4/9  When a private employee fails to report to work on the date specified in the hiring contract he shall be entitled to no pay for the period between the specified and actual dates of work commencement (the pay for the absence period should be deducted from his total pay). The employer in this case shall have the right to terminate the contract, unless the two parties agree on a compensatory period at the end of the contract period.

4/10 For a shared employee, a certain period for performing the work may be specified. When the shared employee fails to do the work during that period, the employer has the right to terminate the contract or a new period can be agreed upon.

4/11 There is no Shari'ah prohibition for any ofthe two types ofemployees (private and  shared)  to receive 'Arboun  (Earnest  Money)  at the time of signing the contract. If the hiring contract is implemented, the  amount  of earnest  money  should  become  a prepaid  part  of the employee's pay, otherwise the earnest money should go to the employee. However, when the contract is not executed the employee



846





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

is preferably supposed to take from such earnest money  only the portion which compensates the actual harm caused to him.

5. Subject Matter of Hiring Contract

The subject matter ofthe hiring contract is the service/work and the pay.

5/1  Rulings pertaining to the service/work

5/1/1  The service/work of the employee which constitutes a subject matter of the contract should be well known,  accomplishable and permissible in Shari'ah.

5/1/2 It is permissible to determine service in terms of a specific work to be done or a specific period of service, or in terms of both. If the employee is able to do all the work within the specified period, he becomes entitled to the whole pay.  If he is able to do only part of it during the period, his entitlement to the pay will depend on two probable outcomes. If the part of the work he has done during the period is in fact useless and cannot be benefited from the employee shall become entitled to no pay. If the accomplished part ofthe work is useful and can be benefited from, and the employer is unwilling to extend the period, the employee shall become entitled to the amount normally paid for similar work (Ajr al-Mithl).

5/1/3 When a person is hired for doing a specific service/work, the employer has no right to hire out the service/work  of such person  to a sub-employer, unless the contract  permits  sub• hiring,  or this has been  agreed upon  by the two parties.  If the hired  service/work  is specifically defined and has to be delivered in the future, the employer in this case has the right to hire out to someone else an identical service/work (Parallel hiring). [see Shari'ah Standard No. (17) on Investment  Sukuk, item 5/2/10]

5/1/4 The employer should stick to utilizing the work/service of the hired person as per the permissible conditions that have been agreed upon.



847





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

5/1/5 When   the  hiring   contract   relates  to  a  specific  service,  the employee (the institution)  should own the service and have the ability to deliver it. Hence, it is impermissible  for the institution to sign a contract with the client before it possesses the service and  becomes  in  a position  to perform  actual  or constructive delivery.

5/1/6 Hiring  can  be  for  performing  a  future  service  that  is  well described  and  specified to  the  extent  which  leaves no  room for ambiguity  and dispute. In that  case the employer  does not have to own the required  service before signing the  contract. Consequently, an agreement may be reached for performing  the service at a specific time in the future, with due consideration to the ability of the employee to own the service and become able to deliver it on time, by himself or through  someone  else. The pay for the service here should not necessarily be made in advance, unless the contract  is a Salam or Salaf contract.  If the employee happens to deliver a service that does not conform to what has been agreed upon, the employer has the right to reject it and insist on having a service that conforms to specifications.

5/2  Rulings pertaining to the pay

5/2/1  The pay, whether in cash, or in-kind  or in the form of a service, should be well known  to  the  extent  that  leaves no  room  for dispute. It can be either fixed or variable according to a method which is well known to the two parties.

5/2/2 The  pay  can be determined for the  work  as a whole  so that the employee  becomes  entitled  to it after doing  all the work, or  it  can  be  determined in  installments and  the  employee becomes entitled to each installment at the relevant  stage of the work done. The pay can also be determined on the basis of a specific period, after which  the employee  becomes entitled to it, or such period can be divided  into sub-periods and the pay  determined accordingly.  Furthermore,  the  pay  can  be determined on  the  basis  of both  the  work  and  the  period,



848





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

and the employee becomes entitled to it when he performs the work within the specified period.  [see item 5/2/9]

5/2/3 The pay becomes obligatory when  the two parties sign the contract, and payable on delivery ofthe service/work or making it available (when the employee puts himself at the disposal of the employer even if the employer has not yet assigned a task to him). After signing the contract, there is no Shari'ah prohibition against forwarding the pay as a lump sum amount, or in installments.

5/2/4 The pay can be variable, yet the amount ofpay for the first period should be known. Following the first period, it is permissible to use an accurate indicator for predetermination ofthe pay for the successive periods. However, such indicator should be known to both parties and mutually agreed upon, for avoidance ofdispute. This indicator which replaces the specifically determined pay for the period should have an upper and a lower limit.

5/2/5 It is permissible, on the consent of the two parties, to amend the pay of future periods  (the periods  in which  benefiting from the service has not yet taken place), whereas the unpaid amounts ofpay that relate to past periods become a debt ob• ligation owed by the employer, and hence it is impermissible to stipulate a condition for increasing such amounts (resched• uling).

5/2/6 The pay can be determined as a percentage of the output (e.g.,
10%) or a part of the thing to be made.

5/2/7 It is permissible to stipulate in the contract  that  in case of default by the employer in the settlement of any installment, or when  he  refrains  from  doing  so without  a reasonable excuse and after a sufficient period  of notification; all other installments shall become  due and  eligible for premature settlement. However, the employee in this case does not own the prepaid installments  finally until he completes the work of the whole hiring period.  [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (8) on Murabahah, item 5/1]



849





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

5/2/8 It is impermissible to make  a condition which  leads  to any increment in the pay agreed upon,  in case of default by the employer. Nevertheless, the contract may include a pledge by the employer to donate, in case of default, a percentage of the pay for charitable purposes. Such donation should entirely go to charitable purposes, under  the supervision of the Sharf'ah Board of the institution.

5/2/9  It is permissible to agree upon more than one rate ofpay, as when the two parties agree that  if the work is done within a certain period  the pay will be this much,  and if it is done in another (shorter)  period  the pay will increase to that  much.  Similarly, two different  rates of pay can also be linked  to two different places, types, or specializations, of the work to be done.

6. Guarantees for Provision of the Pay and the Service

6/1  The employee has the right to obtain the permissible guarantees in their  different  forms so as to document his eligibility for receiving the pay. Likewise, the  employer  has  also the  right  to obtain  such guarantees for receiving  indemnity in case of any transgression or negligence  or breach  of the contract from  the part  of the employ• ee.  The  ruling  here  is,  in  fact, similar  to that  on  documentation and collateralization  (Rahn),  suretyship  (Kafalah)  transfer  of right
(Hawalat al-Haqq) and set-off (Maqassah).  [see Shari'ah  Standard
No.  (5) on Guarantees, item 2/3]

6/2  It is permissible to state in the contract that the pay has to be made in advance, deferred, or in installments. In case ofpremature termination of a contract in which the pay has already been made in advance, the two parties should resort to settlement. When the employee accepts any period  of delay for a pay that has to be settled in advance, such acceptance should be considered as a respite which the employee has willingly granted to the employer, and hence it can by no means be considered as a right of the latter. Due attention shall be given here to item 5/2/2.



850





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

7. Commitments  of the Employee and the Employer

7/1 Commitments of the employee

7I 1/ 1  The private employee has to render his service to the employer and observe the period  of hiring  during which he should not be absent, except on permission of the employer, or to perform a recognizable   duty.  Similarly, the  shared  employee  has  to perform the work  as agreed upon,  and within  the stipulated period, if any.

7/1/2  In principle, the employee is supposed to do the work by himself since he has been hired to perform a specific work required from him, unless the contract stipulates otherwise. This, however, does not hold true in case of hiring someone to do a future service/ work that has been specifically defined. In this latter case, what needs to be catered for is observation  of all the specifications mentioned in the contract.

7/1/3  In hiring of persons, it is permissible to stipulate a penalty code indicating a specific amount which the employee should pay to the employer in case of delay in performing the work/service within  the specified  period.  The amount  to be thus paid has to be determined  with due consideration to normal practice as well as justice.

7/2 Commitments of the employer

7/2/1  The employer shall observe the following:

a) Payment ofthe pay in advance, on deferred payment basis, or in installments as agreed upon. In the absence of agreement on a specific form of payment,  the due pay should be paid after rendering  the complete service to the employer, or on expiry of the hiring  period  in case of private  employment. When a due pay is delayed by the employer in spite of noti• fication the employee has the right to stop work or prevent the employer from utilizing the service that has already been done.



851





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

b) Provision  of facilities/requirements to the employee, if the work to be done so requires, or when provision  of such fa• cilities and requirements is stipulated in the contract.
8. Emergencies, Termination, Expiry and Renewal of Hiring Contracts

8/1  Emergencies of hiring

8/1/1 A  private   or  shared  hiring   contract which   relates  to  the employee in person as per normal practice, shall be terminated on the death of the employee, or when the employee loses his entire legal competence,  or when  - due to injury  or sickness
- he becomes  unable to work anymore  or for a period which is normally  considered to be  too  long  for the  employer  to tolerate.  Such  contract   shall  also  be  terminated when  the employee-institution encounters liquidation, bankru ptcy, or freezing of activities.

8/1/2 When  the employee  refrains  from  delivery  of the  service  as required, and fails to present the suitable alternative  as agreed upon, the employer has the right to terminate  the contract and demand indemnifi cation for the actual harm  caused to him by the act of the employee.
8/2 Termination, expiry and renewal of hiring contracts

8/2/1 In specific hiring, when the service/work becomes completely useless the  contract becomes  null and void;  whereas when  it is partially useless the employer has the right to terminate  the contract. If, instead, the service/work that has become useless pertains to hiring on the basis of future delivery of a well defined service, the contract shall remain valid, and the employee, in this case, has to deliver a similar service.

8/2/2  The hiring  contract  can be terminated  on  the  consent  of its two parties, yet none of them has the independent  right of its termination,  except for  a contingent  excuse or force majeure situation. The employer has the right to terminate the contract on the existence of a defect that makes the service useless. The



852





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

contract can also be terminated on the basis of a conditional option (Khiyar al-Shart), by the party who has stipulated such option, and within its specified period.

8/2/3 The employee has the right to stipulate termination of the contract when the employer fails to make or delay payment of the pay agreed upon, or when the employer does not pay one installment or more of such pay (Khiyar al-Naqd).

8/2/3 On the consent of the two parties, the hiring contract can be terminated before its effectiveness.

8/2/3 Hiring comes to an end at the end of the contract period, yet it remains when it is needed for a reasonable excuse or for avoidance ofharm. In case ofcontinuation, hiring shall be for a pay to be agreed upon between the two parties, otherwise the normal pay for similar services should be applied.

8/2/6 The hiring contract can be renewed for another period, whether renewal is to be declared before expiry of the original contract, or to take place spontaneously. For spontaneous renewal, a con• dition is to be stated in the contract indicating that the contract shall spontaneously become renewed on the commencement of a new period, if none ofthe two parties notifies the other about his disinterest in renewal.

9. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 28 Jumada II, 1429 A.H., corresponding to 2 July
2008A.D.
















853





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons





Adoption of the Standard


The Sharf'ah Board adopted the Standard  on Hiring of Persons in its meeting No.  (21) held on 24-28  Jumada II, 1429  A.H., corresponding to
28 June  - 2 July 2008 A.D.,  in Dar Al-Taqwa Hotel,  in Al-Madinah Al• Munawwarah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.











































854





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons





Appendix  (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (14) held on 21-23 Rabi' I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 30 April - 2 May 2005 A.D., the Shari'ah Board decided to issue a Shari'ah standard on Hiring of Persons (usufructs of services).

On 29 Jumada I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 6 July 2005 A.D., the Secretariat General decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a study on Hiring of Persons (usufructs of services).

A joint  committee  composed  from  Shari'ah Committees  (1) and  (2) held a meeting in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, on 7 Jumada I, 1427 A.H. correspondingto 3 June 2006 A.D. The joint committee discussed and cleared the study, and asked the consultant to prepare the draft of the standard.

In a further meeting ofthe joint committee, held on Thursday 21 Sha'ban
1427 A.H., corresponding to 14  September 2006 A.D., in the Kingdom of Bahrain, the draft of the standard  was discussed and the consultant was requested to introduce necessary amendments in the light ofthe discussions and observations of the meeting.

In its meeting No. (19) held in MakkahAl-Mukarramah on 26-30 Sha'ban
1428 A.H., corresponding to 8-12 September 2007 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed the draft ofthe standard and introduced the changes that it deemed necessary.

In its meeting No.  (20) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on 4-8 Safar
1429  A.H.,  corresponding to  11-15  February  2008  A.D., the  Shari'ah Board discussed  once again the draft standard  and introduced further changes.



855





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

The Secretarial General of AAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 8 Jumada II, 1429 A.H., corresponding  to 12 June 2008 A.D. More than 30 participants attended the session as representatives of central banks, institutions, and accounting firms. The session was also attended by Shari'ah  scholars, university teachers  and  other  interested parties.  Several observations were made in the session, and duly responded to by the members of the Sharf'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2).

In its meeting  No.  (21)  held  in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah,  on  24•
28 Jumada II, 1429 A.H., corresponding  to 28 June - 2 July 2008 A.D., the Shari'ah  Board discussed the draft standard,  introduced  the changes that it deemed necessary and adopted the Standard.







































856





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons





Appendix (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


• Hiring of persons  is permissible according to Qur'an, Sunnah (Prophetic Traditions) and Ijma' (consensus ofFuqaha). In Qur'an this is emphasized in the Verse stating:  {"Then ifthey give suck to the children for you, give them their due payment}.
As far as Sunnah  is concerned, permissibility of hiring of persons can be derived, for instance, from the Hadith of the Prophet (peace be upon him)  in which he said:  "The most eligible  of whatsoever you have got a payfor, is the Book ofAlla• This in addition to many other Hadiths. In this regard, Al-Bukhari presented a whole chapter on Ijarah (hiring) which comprises 22 sections, and so did Abu Dawud, as well as other Sunnah scholars who referred to several Hadiths on the subject within other chapters.
Similarly,  Ijma'  (consensus   of  Fuqaha)  on  permissibility  of  hiring of persons is said to have been reached since the time of the Sahabah (companions of the Prophet, peace be upon him), as well as the time of their successors and the founding leaders of the schools of Fiqh. In this respectAl-Kasani said: "As regards Ijma' ofthe Ummah (Muslim Nation) it had been reached before the existence ofthe deaf......"
• Permissibility ofa pledge which is binding to only one party is supported by a number of Shari'ah proofs which support honoring of contracts, pledges and promises, in addition to what has been emphasized by some Sharf'ah scholars. On this regard, the International Islamic Fiqh Academy issued its

(2) [Al-Talaq (Divorce): 6]; and see: "Jami' Al-Bayan", by Al-Tabari, verified by Mahmoud
Shakir, Dar Ibn Hazm,  [28: 181].
(3) "Sahih AIL-Bukhari" with "Fath Al-Bari" [4: 452-453].
(4) "Bada 'i' AL-Sana'i", Muassasat Al-Tarikh AI-Arabi, Beirut, 1421 A.H. [4: 16].



857





Sharf'ah Standar d No.  (34): Hiring of Persons

resolution No. 40-41 (2/5 & 3/5) on Enforceability ofPledge in Murabahah. The rulings stated in that resolution  also hold true in the case of pledge in hiring and other similar dispositions.
• Permissibility for the institution to receive an amount  from the party who pledges  to  hire  its services  (seriousness  margin),  is based  on  need  and interest. A similar Fatwa (Shari'ah opinion) has been issued in this regard by the Unified Shari'ah Supervisory Board ofAl Baraka Group."That Fatwa is relevant to the case of hiring.
• Enforceability  of the  hiring contract is  derived   from  the  verses and Hadiths which  instruct people  to honor contracts,  as when  Allah,  the Almighty,  says:  {"O you who believe! Fulfill  (your) obligations..3}. besides  the  general  consensus among  fiqh  scholars  on  enforceability of hiring,""  since  it is a contract which  facilitates ownership  through exchange  of two objects.
■  The ruling  that  the period  of hiring  should  be specified stems from  the fact that non-specification could result in prohibited Gharar  (uncertainty) and Jahalah (ignorance)  which lead to dispute.  Prohibition  of sales which involve Gharar (uncertainty) has been emphasized bywellverified Hadiths." Therefore hiring of persons shall not involve Gharar, because, in essence, it is a sale of service/work.
• Permissibility of hiring  of persons  for doing deferred services is based on the practice  of the Prophet (peace be upon  him) when he and Abu Baler hired a man from Bani Al-Dail to serve them as a guide, after three days.0
Moreover, hiring  is a time-based contract  and therefore  its object  can be delivered in the future.
• Permissibility  of taking  'Arboun  (Earnest  Money)  is derived  from what
Omar  did in the presence of Sahabah  (companions  of the Prophet, peace

(5) The Journal of the Academy, Issue No. (5), Vol. (2), (pp. 754 and 965). (6) Fatwa No. (9/10) of the Unified Sharf'ah Board ofAl Baraka.
(7) [AI-Ma'idah (The Table): 1].
(8) "AL-Fatawa Al-Hindiyyah" [4: 410]; "AI-Sharh AL-Kabir"  [2: 4]; "AL-Rawdah"  [5: 173];
and "AL-Mughni" with "AI-Sharh AL-Kabir" [6: 20].
(9) "Sahih Muslim" [5: 3]; and "Sunan Abu Dawud" (H: 3376).
(10) "Sahih AL-Bukhari" with "AL-Fath [4: 443], AI-Matba'ah Al-Salafiyyah.



858





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (34): Hiring of Persons

be upon him), and adopted by Ahmad. On this regard, The Islamic Fiqh Academy of Makkah Al-Mukarramah  has also issued its resolution No.  72 (3/8).
• Sub-hiring  is permissible because when  the employer owns the  service/
work he becomes able to transfer it to someone else.
■  The ruling that a hiring contract can be conditional is based on the Hadith of the Prophet  (peace be upon him) which indicates:  "Muslims are at their conditions,  except a  condition  that permits what has  been prohibited  or prohibit what has been permitted?D
■  The ruling that hiring for a specific service is impermissible before owning and possessing the service, is reached by analogy to prohibition  of selling things that one does not own, and the Hadith which has been narrated by
Hakim Ibn Hizam stating:  "Don't sell what you do not have".3
• Permissibility of signing a hiring  contract  for a service to be delivered in the future, is judged by analogy to Salam, and because that does not lead to dispute. According to the Shaff'i and Hanbali scholars the pay should not necessarily be made in advance.
■  A private employee should not guarantee what he works on, except in case of transgression, negligence,  or breach of a condition.  This is actually the general principle in trust-based  contracts; in addition to that, the contract comprises an interest  for the  employee since he will receive the pay.  In case of transgression, negligence, or breach of condition the act results in harm, and hence the employee has to indemnify  the employer, as per the directives of the Prophet (peace be upon him) who said:  "No harm, and no
reciprocal harm"
■  The ruling that a shared employee has to guarantee what he works on,  is based on what has been reported about some of the Sahabah (companions
of the Prophet - peace be upon him) who emphasized that this has to be so,

(11) Related by AI-Bukhari:  "Fath AL-Bart",  "Kitab Al-ljarah" [4: 451]; and "Abu Dawud"
with "Awn AI-Ma'bud" [9: 516].
(12) Related by Abu Dawud in his "Sunan" (H: 3530); Al-Nasa'i in his "Sunan" [2: 225]; Ibn
Majah in his "Sunan" (H: 2187), and Ahmad in his "Musnad" [3: 42].
(13) Related  by Malik in  "AI-Muwatta",   "Kitab Al-Aqdiyah" [1:  464]; Ahmad  in  his
"Mausnad" [1: 313]  and [5: 327] and Ibn Majah in his "Sunan" [2: 784].



859





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (34): Hiring of Persons

because the shared employee will be doing what he has been paid to do in the absence of the owner, besides the fact that the employee in this case is working for many employers rather than for a particular employer.9
■  The  hired  service  shall  be  permissible  because  what  is  prohibited  by Shari'ah cannot be an object of a Sharf'ah-recognizable contract. Moreover, impermissible hiring entails provision of support to wrongdoing and misbehavior; whereas Allah, the Most High, says:  {"Help you one another
in Al-Birr and Al-Taqwa (virtue, righteousness andpiety, but do not help
one another in sin and transgression"}.A5
• The pay for future hiring periods  can be adjusted  on mutual  consent of the two parties,  because  such adjustment constitutes contract renewal for a coming  period.  No pay has yet become  payable  to the  employee for that future period  so that  it can become  a debt owed the employer, and   consequently  lead  to  prohibited  rescheduling  of  debt.  When, instead, such adjustment is done for an unsettled  amount  of pay which belongs to past periods, so as to extend the repayment period  against an increase in the  amount  to be paid, adjustment in this case will lead to Riba (usury). The  11 Seminar  of Al Baraka has already issued a Fatwa in this connection.09
■  The ruling that the pay can be composed  of two parts  is based on Tradi (mutual  consent), in addition  to the fact that such arrangement  neither violates the contract rulings nor does it encounter  a Shari'ah prohibition.
■  The pay can be in the form of a common  share, because the pay in this form can be known, and will not lead to dispute or Gharar (uncertainty).
• Permissibility of stipulating in the contract that all outstanding installments of the  pay  shall  become  due  in  case of default by the  employer in the settlement ofany installment is based on Tradi (mutual consent), besides the fact that such a condition neither violates the contract nor does it encounter
Sharf'ah prohibition. The Prophet (peace be upon him) said:  "Muslims are

(14)  "Bada 'f' AI-Sana  'i"  [4:  210];  "Hashiyat AL-Dusuqi"  [4: 23];  "Maughni AL-Muhtaj"
[2: 351] and  "AL-Mughni" with "Al-Sharh  Al-Kabir" [6:  115]. (15)  [AL-Madah (The Table): 2].
(16) The Book on Resolutions  and Recommendations of Al Baraka Seminar (11/2).



860





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

bound by the conditions the make".cm In this regard the International Islamic
Fiqh Academy has also issued its resolution No. 64 (2/7).0
• Impermissibility of stipulating a condition for increasing pay overdues is based on the fact that any increment  in such amounts  (against extension of settlement period) is Riha (usury). In this connection, The International Islamic Fiqh Academy issued its resolution No.  133 (7/14).9
• Permissibility of applying two rates  of pay  (so  that  the  employer would become entitled to the higher rate when he performs the work in the shorter period and vice versa) stems from the fact that such arrangement does not lead to Gharar (uncertainty) or Jahalah (ignorance). In addition to that, such arrangement had been Traditionally resorted to, and approved by a number of Fiqh scholars.
• Permissibility of seeking payment  guarantees, is similar to permissibility of Kafalah (suretyship) and Tawthiqat (documentations) in Islamic juris• prudence, besides the fact that request for guarantees here does not violate the rulings of the contract but rather confirms them, since guarantees are
suitable for debt contracts.
■  The contract  becomes  null  and void when  the service is completely  or partially  useless,  because  the  outcome  of the  contract  has  not  been accomplished, and the contract has not achieved its objectives. In addition to all that, the pay  is supposed  to be made  against  the benefit.  In this respect, the International Islamic Fiqh Academy issued its Resolution No.
13 (1/3).  If, instead, the contract relates to a specifically defined service
which  has to be delivered  in the  future,  the  contract  does not  become null and void because the service in question  will still remain  as a debt, and the employee should be asked to provide a service that has the same specifications.
■  The ruling that hiring will come to an end on expiry of the contract period
or on the consent ofthe two parties, is based on the fact that a hiring contract

(17) Reference has been referred to earlier.
(18) The Journal of the Academy, No. (6), (P. 193) and No. (7), Vol. (2), (P. 9). (19) The Journal of the Academy, No. (14), Vol.(4), (P. 687).
(20) See:  "AL-Fatawa Al-Hindiyyah" [4: 445] and "Al-Mughni" by Ibn Qudamah [5: 442].
(21)  See: the Journal ofthe Academy, No. (2), Vol. (2), (P. 527) and No. (3), Vol. (1), (P 77).



861





Sharf'ah Standard No. (34): Hiring of Persons

is a time-based contract and therefore, it expires at the end of the period. Similarly, a hiring contract is a consensual contract which starts and ends on the consent of the two parties.
• Permissibility of spontaneous renewal of the contract when it is stipulated as a condition  or when agreed upon between the two parties,  stems from the fact that such condition does not violate the rulings of the contract The Prophet  (peace be upon him) said:  "Muslims are bound by the conditions
the make".3
■  The basis for the commitments  of the employee and the employer is that such commitments  constitute essential requisites of the contract for hiring ofpersons. Moreover, such commitments are based on the agreement of the two parties. Both of these two justifications are unanimously  accepted by Shari'ah scholars.09
■    The ruling that a hiring contract which relates to the employee in person becomes null and void on the death, loss oflegal competency or persistent sickness of the employee, is based on the fact that the object of contracting will, thus, become no longer existent. Consequently, there will also be no pay since the pay is to be made in exchange of the benefit. In addition to all that, this ruling conforms to normal practice.
■  The ruling that a contract which relates to a future service does not become null and void on the death of the employee, is based on the fact that in this case the service, as a debt, is considered as existent
■  The pay shall become  due even if the employer could not benefit  from the employee who had put himself at his disposal. This ruling  is based on the fact that  the employee  is entitled  to the  pay since he has been able to  fulfill  the  condition of putting himself at the  disposal  of the employer, while  the  employer  has  no  excuse  for not  benefiting from the services.
• Permissibility of terminating  the hiring contract in case of contingencies is based on observation of need and necessity of avoiding hardship, in addi-

(22) Reference has been referred to earlier.
(23) See:  "Bada 'r' Al-Sana'i" [4  :210];  "Tabyin AL-Haqa 'iq" [5:  124]; Al-Dusuqi in "Al• Sharh AL-Kabir" [4: 23]; "Maughni AL-Muhtaj" [2: 351; and "AL-Maughni" with "AI-Sharh AL-Kabir" [6:115].



862





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (34): Hiring of Persons

tion to normal practice. A Fatwa in this regard has been issued by the Board of Fatwa and Shari'ah Supervision of the Kuwait Finance House.
• Permissibility for the employee to state a condition for termination of the contract when the pay is delayed is based on the fact that such condition is fair, and does not violate the rulings of the contract. The Prophet (peace be upon him) said:  "Muslims are at their conditions".5










































(24) Fatwa No. (232) and No. (252).
(25) Reference has been referred to earlier.



863

























Shari'ah Standard No. (35)




Zakah












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                             869
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................        870

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               870
2. Procedural Rulings...................................................................................        870
3. General Rulings........................................................................................       872
4. Fixed Assets...............................................................................................        874
5. Zakatable Assets........................................................................................       876
6. Liabilities....................................................................................................       888
7. Provisions..................................................................................................       891
8. Reserves                                                                                                   894
9. Eight Heads of Zakah Disbursement....................................................         896
10. Rulings Relating to Zakah Disbursement..............................................       896
11. Nisab and Zakah Rate for Livestock (An'am)                                             898
12. Date of Issuance of the Standard.............................................................       899
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        900
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard...............       901
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard....................................        903
Appendix (c):  Definitions..............................................................................        904














867








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This standard  aims to identify the  Zakah base for Islamic financial Institutions  (Institution/Institutions)," and indicate the different types of zakatable assets and the liabilities (debts ofthe Institution)  and allocations that have to be deducted from them. The standard also aims to illustrate the payable Zak.ah rates, and indicate the specific heads ofZakahdisbursements.






























(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



869





Shari'ah Standard No. (35): Zakah





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard  covers identification  of the Zakah base for Institutions (including Islamic insurance companies) as well as the subsidiary and the mother company ofthe Institution (the company). This will be done through identification ofthe items of financial statements that should or should not be included in calculation ofthe Zakah base, and the liabilities or allocations that should or should not be deducted from Zakatable assets. The standard also covers payable Zakah rates, disbursement  of Zakah funds on the eight categories of Zakah recipients, and the rulings pertaining to disbursement.

2. Procedural Rulings

2/1  Methods of calculation of Zakah base

There are two methods for calculation of Zakah base: the first is the method ofnet assets, and the second is the method ofnet investment assets. The two methods have different bases of assessment, yet if such difference is well recognized the final outcome will be the same. This standard is based on the net assets method.

Net Assets Method

2/1/1  Calculation of Zakah base by using the net assets method is done as follows:
Zakah base = Zakatable assets - (liabilities payable during the financialyear as at the date ofthe balance sheet+ all installments ofliabilities ofthe financial year which will become due during the coming financial period  + rights of the holders of non• restricted investment accounts + minority rights +sovereign rights +waqf rights+ charitable rights+ rights of non-profit• earning organizations that have no specific owner).



870





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

Zakatable assets include: cash and the like, receivables (mi• nus)  doubtful  debts,  assets prepared  for trading  (such  as goods, financial papers and real estate), and financing assets (Mudarabah,  Musharakah,  Salam, Istisna'a .....).  Deductions from financial assets include fixed assets relating to them as well as deductible allocations as shown in item 7.

2/1/2 Assets prepared for trade are to be assessed in terms of their expected cash value (selling market value) at the time when Zakah is due.

2/ 1/3  In determination ofzakatable assets in agriculture and livestock other than articles of trade, application of the ratios and rates specified by Shari'ah should be observed.

2/2 Direct payment of Zakah by the institution

2/2/1 The institution  or the company is committed  to pay Zakah under the following cases:
a) Enactment of an enforceable Zakah law.

b) Stipulation of commitment to pay Zakah in the articles of association.
c) Issuance of a Zakah commitment resolution by the general assembly.

2/2/2 When the Institution  accepts agency for payment  of Zakah on behalf of all or some of its equity holders or the holders of investment accounts, funds should be available - or submitted by the principals of such agency - for payment  of Zakah on their behalf.

2/2/3 There should be coordination between the mother Company and its subsidiaries with regard to payment of Zakah so as to avoid double payment.

2/2/4 In case of establishing a Zakah fund, or preparing Zakah ac• counts, clearance by the Shari'ah Board of the institution  or the company should be obtained.  Clearance by the Shari'ah



871





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

Board is particularly required for disbursement of the Zak.ah funds, when performed  directly by the institution/company, or through  an accredited Zak.ah agency. Moreover, a compre• hensive report on Zak.ah disbursements  should be presented to the Sharf'ah Board on annual basis.

2/2/5 In the absence of any ofthe conditions indicated in item (2/2/1) above, payment  of Zak.ah shall become the responsibility of shareholders and holders of the investment accounts. In this case the Institution or the companyhas to indicate the amount of Zakah payable per share or per a given balance ofan investment account.

2/3  Zakah-related financial statements

2/3/1 The Balance sheet

Due to the fact that Zak.ah relates to ownership  of zakatable assets, what matters  to the Institutions in Zak.ah calculation is the  financial  data  included  in  the  balance  sheet  of the institution  (the budget), which  comprises  assets, liabilities, and their related allocations.

2/3/2 Income statement

Income  statement  (profit  and loss account)  does not  form a basis for Zak.ah calculation, yet it is referred to for knowing the income or profit of the income-earning fixed assets. In order to pay Zak.ah the Institution  should not necessarily be making profits. Incurring  losses by the Institution  does not prevent  Zak.ah from  becoming  due. The  Institution  is still committed  to pay Zak.ah, except when its liabilities (debtors) absorb all its assets.

3. General Rulings

3/1  Shari'ah definition  of Zak.ah,  status (Hulan)  of Zak.ah in Shari'ah, and Zakatable funds



872





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

3/1/1  Zak.ah is a right which becomes due in certain types ofwealth, and disbursable  to specific categories of recipients. It is an in rem duty when its conditions  are satisfied.

3/1/2 Zak.ah is obligatory  on gold, silver, currencies,  trade articles, livestock (camels, cows and goats), agricultural produce, min• erals and Rikaz (treasures).

3/1/3 Zak.ah is not  obligatory  on wages, salaries and  income  from free occupations  at the time of receiving such income; whereas it is obligatory on that portion of such income which remains unexpended for a whole year.

3/1/4 Zak.ah is not obligatory on fixed assets which generate income and  which  are not  acquired  for trade, such  as leased  assets. Nevertheless, at the end of the year, Zak.ah is obligatory on the remaining portion  of the income generated by these assets.

3/1/5 Zak.ah is not obligatory on public wealth (public sector) or the insurance  funds of public institutions.

3/1/6 Zak.ah is not  obligatory  on the  charitable  Waqf (al-Waqf al• Khayri). As  regards  the  family  Waqf  (al-Waqf al-Ahli)  the beneficiaries  should  pay Zak.ah,  at the  end  of the year,  from that portion of the Waqf income which remains unexpended.

3/1/7 The  above  ruling  which  relates  to  exemption   of charitable Waqf from Zakah is also applicable to trust funds as well Irsad (allocation) of public funds and properties for (non-profiteering) educational, charitable, and social Institutions, which have no specific owner, even if such institutions make profits.
3/2 Conditions for Zakah obligation

3/2/1  Full ownership

Full ownership materializes when nobody else has a right in the asset in question, the owner can dispose of the asset the way he likes, and the owner of the asset is the sole owner of the income generated  from the asset. In this case, no matter  if the asset is



873





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

allocated for any specific purpose other than settlement ofdebts (for instance, no matter if it is allocated for implementation of investment projects).

3/2/2 Nisab (Zakatable wealth stratum)

The Nisab for gold regardless of its form is 85 grams of pure gold or its equivalent in currency (paper or coins), and the same Nisab is also applicable to articles oftrade after valuation, as well as to extracted minerals. For silver, the Nisab is 595 grams of pure silver. The Nisab which is widely recognized as applicable to articles of trade is that of gold. Nisab for Zakah on livestock is shown at the end ofthis standard.

3/2/4 AI-Hawl (Zakah year)

The Zakah year for cash and commercial  assets as well as livestock is a lunar year (354 days). In case ofadopting the solar year for cash and commercial assets, the Zakah rate becomes
2.577%. As regards agricultural products no consideration is
to be given to the Hawl (Zakah year) because what matters is harvesting. Similarly what should be considered for minerals and Rikaz (treasures) is their extraction.

3/3  Applicable Zakah rate

The rate ofZakah applicable to gold, silver, currencies and articles of trade is 2.5%- with due consideration to item 3/2/3 above -,whereas the rate applicable to agricultural produce  is one tenth  (10%) for the produce of non-irrigated  lands, half of the tenth  (5%) for the produce of irrigated lands,  and three quarters of the tenth  (7.5%) for the produce ofpartially irrigated lands. Zakah rates applicable to livestock are shown at the end ofthis standard.

4. Fixed Assets

4/1  Operational fixed assets

Zakah is not obligatory on operational fixed assets such as the prem•
ises ofthe institution and its equipments; or on intangible assets such

(2) 1n a leap year the rate is 2.5775



874





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

as patent rights,  trademarks  and computer software.  Zakah is also not obligatory on moveable assets acquired for operation (other than those prepared for trade) such as spare parts and tools used for fur• ther production, even when such assets are kept in the warehouses.

4/2 Income-generating  fixed assets

There  is no  Zakah  on  fixed assets which  generate  income  like Mustghallat (leased assets), if such assets are not acquired for trade. Nevertheless,  Zakah is obligatory,  at the end of the year,  on the unexpended  portion  of the income  generated  by such assets, by adding that  portion  of income to the other  zakatable assets and applying the Zakah rate.

Income-earning fixed assets appear in the financial statements under the following items:

4/2/1 Mustaghallat  (leased assets such  as real estate properties, transportation vehicles..etc.).  At  the  end  of the  year,  the unexpended rental of these assets is to be subjected to Zakah by adding it to other zakatable assets.

4/2/2 Real estate investments: At the end ofthe year, the unexpended income of these assets is to be subjected to Zakah by adding it to other zakatable assets.

4/2/3 Capital projects  under  implementation (which are not  for trading)

If a project of this type happens to generate income at some of its stages of implementation, Zakah is obligatory on the unex• pended part ofthat income, after adding it to zakatable assets at the end of the year. If such projects are being implemented for trading purposes. [see item (5/2/6/3)]
4/2/4 Investments in shares with the aim ofretaining them (Nama')

If it is possible to know through the company what is the exact amount ofZakatable assets (cash, articles oftrade and repayable debts) per share, Zakah can be levied on that amount, otherwise Zakah is to be levied on the portion ofzakatable assets per share,



875





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

which has to be reached through estimation. Ifthe company has no zakatable assets, Zak.ah is obligatory on the remaining part ofthe net income at the end ofthe year.

As far as shares owned for non-trading purposes are concerned, no allocation for deterioration in the value of share investments should be made from the zakatable assets. Regarding shares acquired for trading purposes, the ruling on articles of trade (item 5/2) should be applied.

4/2/5 Investment in the shares of subsidiaries

In, accounting, a subsidiary is the entity in which the mother company  owns  50% of the  shares.  The  process  of Zak.ah payment in this case starts with calculating the Zak.ah of the subsidiary independently, and then the mother company pays its share of Zak.ah in proportion  to its shareholding  in the subsidiary. The remaining part of the Zak.ah of the subsidiary is to be  paid  by the  other  parties  (minority rights).  Such arrangement holds true when the subsidiary does not pay its Zakah directly.

5. Zakatable Assets

5/1  Liquid or easy-to-liquidate current assets

Such  assets  which  include  cash  assets  and  assets  which  can be converted  into cash (quasi cash), are shown in the financial statements  under the following items:

5/1/1  Cash in hand: Zak.ah has to be paid from these funds. If such funds are in foreign currency Zak.ah should be paid from the equivalent  amount  in local currency  as per  the  prevailing exchange rate on the date when Zak.ah is due.

5/1/2 Gold and silver assets in any form: Zak.ah on such assets is to be assessed on the basis of their net weight or cash value.

(3) From a Shari'ah point ofview, the same ruling is applicable when the mother institution owns less than 50% ofthe shares ofthe subsidiary.



876





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

5/1/3 Bank balances: banlc balances constitute the following items in the financial statements:

5/1/3/1 Current accounts

Institutions  and companies should pay Zakah from their  current  accounts  with  other  Institutions, be• cause such accounts constitute debts that will certainly be settled. Current  accounts include those with the central bank as well as those with other banks. When the Institution obtains interest in such accounts (though it is prohibited) it should pay Zakah from the principal amounts  and donate the whole amount of the interest for charitable purposes. For the banks or the Institutions  which receive such deposits current accounts constitute liabilities.  [see item 6/3/1]

5/1/3/2 Investment accounts

a) The owners of these accounts should pay Zakah from the investment balances as well as the profits, whether such accounts represent short or long term deposits, and even if drawing from the account is restricted by the investment Institution or the owner. If these accounts are invested through per• missible modes, what really matters is their share in the investment assets, rather than their share in the invested amounts. Consequently due consideration has to be given to the nature of the assets represen• ting the invested amounts.

As for the institutions in which the accounts are invested,  an account of this type represents a trust (Amanah) rather than a liability, and therefore these Institutions should pay Zakah only on their share of the profits or their commissions, as part oftheir cash assets.



877





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

b) When the investment accounts earn interests (though prohibited) Zakah is payable from the principal, while the entire amount of interest should be donated for charitable purposes. As for the banks in which these interest bearing accounts are deposited, the principal amounts  (excluding  interest)  represent liabilities. [see item 6/3/2]

5/1/4 Bonds, Sukuk and funds

5/1/4/1 Bonds and treasury bills (which represent debts and involve  interest  - though  prohibited):  Zakah  from the principal of the bond  (cost  of the bond)  should be paid, whereas the entire amount of interest should be donated  for charitable purposes. As  regards the issuing banks, the nominal value of these bonds and bills represent a liability.  [see item 6/3/2]

5/1/4/2 Investment  Sukuk  of different  types:  Their  owners should pay Zakah on the basis ofthe underlying assets of these Sukuk, and as indicated in this Standard. As for the Institutions which manage the assets or keep the  investment  Sukuk, the  Sukuk represent  a trust (Amanah) rather than a liability, and therefore these Institutions should pay Zakah only on their share of the profits or their commissions, as part of their cash assets.

5/1/4/3 Investment Funds in their different forms: Zakah has to be paid on the basis of the underlying assets of the fund, and as indicated in this Standard.

5/1/5 Amounts retained for documentation ofthe deal

5/1/5/1 Hamish Jiddiyyah  (security  deposit):  This  refers to the advance amount which the client pays in order to confirm his binding pledge. Such amount is supposed to cover any harm  caused by recoiling of the client from completion of the deal:  Zakah on such amount



878





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

shall be paid by the client. If the amount is deposited in a current  account it shall become subject to the rulings shown in item 5/7/3/1  and if it is deposited in an investment account it shall become subject to the rulings indicated in item. [5/1/3/2]

5/1/5/2 The initial security for entering bids as well as imple• mentation security: are to be ducted from the zakatable assets ofthe Institution which receives them, while the owner of such amount has to pay Zakah it annually as part of his assets, unless he has not been enabled to invest it before refund. When several years elapse be• fore refund, Zakah for one year has to be paid. If such amounts  are deposited  in an investment  account it shall become subject to the rulings stipulated in item. [5/1/3/2]

5/1/5/3 Cash security charged to individuals and Institutions for obtaining certain services such as telephone and electricity services, or security paid on renting shops and equipments: Zakah should be paid by the owner of such amount on refund, and for one year, unless he has been enabled to invest the amount before refund. If the owner of the amount has been enabled to invest it before refund Zakah has to be paid subject to the rulings stated in item. [5/1/5/2]

5/1/5/4 'Arboun (Earnest Money): To be deducted from the zakatable assets of the buyer, while the seller should pay Zakah from it as part ofhis Zakatable assets, since he will get the amount if the contract is concluded or not.

5/2  Commodity current assets (Articles of Trade)

5/2/1 Articles of trade include anything offered for sale such as real estate and moveable assets, whether the good is being sold in



879





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

its current state or after manufacturing, and when it is acquired through buying or otherwise. To be subject to Zakah payment such goods should not necessarily be obtained through buying, the mere intention to offer them for sale is quite sufficient.

5/2/2 Articles oftrade should be valued at selling market price in the place where theyexist, and according to the method oftheir sale (retail, or wholesale, or if both whichever the predominant). Articles of trade should not be valued at cost or market price whichever the less. However, when other methods ofvaluation are extremely difficult, valuation at cost can be used for Zakah purposes. When  there  is a price change during  the period between the date ofaccrual and date ofpayment of Zakah, the price at the date of Zakah accrual should be adopted.

5/2/3 When the articles oftrade are subject to another type ofZakah treatment  (e.g., when  the  articles of trade  are livestock  or agricultural  produce)  they should become subject to Zakah on articles of trade only.

5/2/4 In principle, Zakah on articles oftrade is to be paid in cash, yet in case oftrade recession it can be paid in kind (from the same articles oftrade), provided that the interest ofZakah recipients could, thus, be achieved.

5/2/5 Zakah has to be paid on the goods earmarked  for the buyer after concluding the contract, even if he has not yet possessed them.

5/2/6 Applications relating to commodity current assets in the items of financial statements

5/2/6/1 Commodity stocks prepared for Trade, raw materials in their  different  forms, and goods for sale in their original form or after being manufactured by adding them to other materials: To be valued for Zakah pur• poses at selling market price.



880





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

If a good of this type is defective it shall be valued at its selling market  price  and as per the method  of its sale (retail, or wholesale, or ifboth whichever the pre• dominant).  If the good in question  is a slow-moving item it can be valued for Zakah at its market price and in its current  form. When  an allocation  is made  for such goods it should not be deducted  from  zakatable assets.

5/2/6/2 Goods  in  process:  To be  valued  for  Zakah  at  their current  market price on the day of Zakah accrual, and if it is not possible to know  their  market  value, they could be valued at cost.

5/2/6/3 Works under  implementation (constructions): To be valued  for Zakah  in their  current state on the day of Zakah accrual.

5/2/6/4 Industrial  accessories (spare parts) used in production equipment: are not part of Zakatable assets.

5/2/6/5 Goods in transit: To be valued for Zakah at market price in the place where they are found

5/2/6/6 Goods to be sold by others on commission (by agency): To be valued for Zakah  at market  price  in the  place where they are found.

5/2/6/7 Goods imported through documentary credits covered by the Institution,  including  the expenses of opening the credit and the amounts  retained  by intermediary banks: Zakah should be paid on the amounts  retained for the credit,  and not the expenses. When  the goods are owned  Zakah  has  to be paid  from  them  on  the basis of their market value.

5/2/6/8 Goods prepared for export through documentary  cred•
its to the benefit ofthe Institution: The amounts retained



881





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

for the credit, are neither subject to Zakah nor are they deductable from zakatable assets, since they have not yet been possessed. However, Zakah has to be paid on the goods that are still held by the Institution as part of its finished goods or goods in process.

5/2/7 Intangible rights prepared for trade such as copy right, patent right, trademarks,  and computer  software: should be subject to Zakah on articles of trade.

5/2/8 End of the year stock of raw materials  (primary  materials) which are normally used as ingredients and remain as compo• nents of the goods manufactured for trade: Should be valued for Zakah at their market value before entering the process of manufacturing. No Zakah is payable on supporting materials which do not represent  ingredients  of or remain as compo• nents of the manufactured goods, such as fuel and cleaning materials.

5/2/9 Finished goods and goods in process being manufactured  for trade: are subject to the same rate applicable to Zakah on articles of trade. Finished goods and goods in process should be valued in their current state and at market price.

5/2/10 Rapping  and  packing  materials:  are not  to be included  in valuation ofgoods for Zakah ifsuch materials are not prepared for trade  separately.  Nevertheless,  if such materials increase the value ofthe goods they should be included.

5/3  Receivables of the institution or the company

5/3/1  If the debt owed to the Institution is a cash amount the Institu• tion should pay Zakah on it annually - whether such debt is due or not - since the Institution will certainly receive it. As for bad debts (non-repayable debts) and doubtful debts the Institution does not have to pay Zakah except for one year after collection of such debts, and as per the rulings indicated in item 6/2.



882





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

5/3/2 The institution can postpone Zak.ah on its outstanding debts until full or partial collection. On collection, the Institution has to pay Zak.ah for the whole past period. When  a specific debt is partially  doubtful, and  an allocation  is made  for doubtful debts, the  doubtful  part  of the  debt  can  be  deducted  from Zakatable assets, if the total amount  of such debt has initially been included  in the these assets.

5/3/3 When  the debt owed to the institution by another  party  com• prises interest that has arisen from the process oflending and borrowing or from  rescheduling  of the  debt; the  Institution should pay Zak.ah on the principal only and donate the whole amount  of interest  for charitable  purposes.  It should, howev• er, be noted that interest bearing  deposits and loans as well as discounting of receipt papers  are strictly prohibited  dealings which should be avoided.

5/3/4 Applications relating  to Receivables in the items of financial statements

5/3/4/1 Debtors: Zak.ah shall be paid on the amounts payable to the Institution  against goods or services sold on debt. In this respect, due consideration should be given to the above-mentioned items.

5/3/4/2 Loans, overdraft  accounts,  and debt  bonds  including discounted  bonds (zero coupon) and accepted bills (discounted  bills): Zakah  is payable on the value paid for purchasing  the  bond,  whereas  interest - though prohibited -  should  become  subject  to  the  rulings indicated  in item 5/3/4.

5/3/4/3 Receipt  papers  (bills  and  promissory   notes):  Zak.ah shall be paid on the principal ofthe debt (amount ofthe paper),  including  the increment  added to the price,  if the paper relates to a commodity sold on debt. It shall be noted here that the case will remain the same whether



883





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

the debt represented by the paper is due or not, since no difficulty is going to be encountered in its collection. If the paper comprises interest the rulings indicted in item 5/3/4 regarding interest should be observed.

5/3/4/4Arnounts retained  from  contracts:  Such guarantee amounts  are held by the clients to ensure  that  the Institution is going to honor its commitments. If the Institution  has not been enabled to invest these re• tention  amounts  it should not pay Zakah on them. However, on receipt of the amounts  the Institution has to pay Zakah on them for only one year.

5/3/4/5Advance payments  on signing contracts: No Zakah shall be paid on them, since they are no longer owned by the Institution.

5/3/4/6 Prepaid expenses: No Zakah is payable on such amounts which represent expenses of forthcoming financial pe• riods, since they are no longer owned by the Institution.

5/3/4/7 Accrued income:  It represents income of the current period which has not yet been received, and it shall be subject to Zakah on debts as indicated in item 5/3/1.

5/3/4/8 Legal deposit: It refers to the amount retained by a bank on request of the concerned authorities for the sake of awarding license to the Institution. The Institution cannot withdraw or dispose of such amount  except on  permission  of the  concerned  authorities.  If the institution has not been enabled to invest the retained amount it shall pay Zakah on it for only one year at the time of refund.  If such deposit involves interest (though prohibited) the rulings indicated in item 5/3/4 should be applied.

5/3/4/9 Murabahah debtors: It indicates the amounts owed by purchasers. Zakah in this case is payable on total price including profits, as indicated in item 5/3/1.



884





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

5/3/4/10 Debtors of Salam goods purchased by the Institution and not yet received: the Institution should pay Zak.ah on Salam capital if the goods have been purchased for trading purposes. When the goods are purchased for operating or income generating purposes the rulings indicated in item 4/1 and 4/2 should be applied. As regards the Salam capital received by the seller of the goods, such income is subject to Zak.ah as part of the seller's cash assets.

5/3/4/11 Debtors of Istisna'a goods sold by the institution: This item represents the balance ofamounts due to the Insti• tution as per delivery dates of the Istisna'a commodity. Such amounts are part of Zakatable assets, and Zakah has to be paid on them under the category of current assets, because they constitute cash amounts.

5/3/4/12 Debtors of Istisna'a goods purchased by the institution: When such goods are purchased for the sake oftrading, the debt relating to them (the price which the Institution is committed to pay to the seller) should be included in zakatable assets, and subjected to Zakah as per item
5/3/1.

5/3/4/13 Investment in shares for the sake of trading:  Should become subject to the Zakah rate applicable to articles for trade. Valuation has to be at market price, yet in the absence of any market for such shares, valuation can be made by experts.

5/3/5 Debtors in an insurance portfolio

As indicated in the Sharf'ah standard on Islamic Insurance the contributions of policyholders constitute a fund which has an independent financial liability, and the contributor is supposed to have given the premium as a donation. Consequently, the in• surance fund is not committed to pay back any excess amounts to policyholders [items 2 and 5/5 of the Shari'ah Standard No.



885





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

(26) on Islamic Insurance]. In view ofthis no Zak.ah is payable by the insurance portfolio.

5/4 Zakah on agricultural produce and fruits

5/4/1 The Nisab for agricultural produce and fruits is 653 kilograms.
No consideration should be given to the Hawl (Zak.ah year) because what matters here is harvesting. The applicable Zakah rate is one tenth (10%) for the produce ofnon-irrigated lands, half of the tenth (5%) for the produce of irrigated lands, and three quarters of the tenth (7.5%) for the produce of partially irrigated lands.

5/4/2 In calculation of the Nisab  different types of the same kind of produce can be added together, such as the different types of the same kind of grain or fruit, whereas different kinds of produce or fruits cannot be added together. Each kind of produce or fruit should have its separate Nisab.  It makes no difference when the agricultural produce or fruits owned by the same Institution or company are in different geographical locations.

5/4/3 Khars (estimation by experts) can be adopted when the agri• cultural products  or fruits are ripe. One fourth or one third can be deducted and left to the owner and the rest becomes subject to Zakah on the basis of Khars after the produce  is dried. Zakah can also be paid in terms ofvalue.

5/4/4 Works under implementation (constructions) relating to agri•
culture are not part of Zakatable assets.

5/4/5 Production requirements such as fertilizers and insecticides are not part of zakatable assets, and should not be deducted from the Zakah base unless they have been obtained through debt.

5/4/6 Rapping and packing materials are not part ofzakatable assets.

5/4/7 Expenses relating to irrigation, land development, irrigation channels and soil woks shall not be deducted from zakatable assets.



886





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

5/4/8 Cost of delivery to recipients shall be deducted from zakatable assets.
5/4/9 Zakah on the produce of a rented agricultural land should be paid by the tenant. In case of Muzara'ah or Musaqat, Zakah shall be paid by the two parties proportionately.

5/4/10 Subsidies and concessions related to agriculture: Cash subsi• dies shall be included in the Zakah base as part ofliquid assets subject to item 5/3/1, whereas free-of-charge land and equip• ment should not.

5/5  Zakah on minerals

5/5/1 Minerals here include all stuffs ofthis kind extracted from the earth or the sea whether in liquid, solid or gaseous form.

5/5/2 The Nisab for minerals is what has reached in value 85 kilograms of gold. Nisab is to be assessed for quantities extracted continuously. If extraction is suspended for an abnormal period assessment of Nisab shall start at the time when extraction is resumed again. The Zakah rate applicable to minerals is 2.5%. If the extracted minerals are owned by the state no Zakah shall be paid on them, otherwise minerals are the property of their extractor, and he should pay Zakah on them.  [see Shari'ah Standard No. (22) on Concession Contracts]

5/5/3 Pearl, coral and fish extracted from the sea for trade should become subject to the Zakah rate applicable to articles oftrade.

5/6 Zakah on livestock

Nisabs and Zakah rates for livestock (camels, cows and goats) are shown at the end ofthis standard. Livestock that reaches the Nisab is subject to Zakah, whether owned for milk or progeny. The animals shall become subject to the Zakah rate on livestock, only if they are fed through free grazing, most of the year. If the animals are owned for trade they shall become subject to the Zakah rate on articles of trade.



887





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

5/6/1 It makes no difference ifthe animals which belong to the same owner are found in the same place or different places. Mixed ownership can also be recognized so that the animals owned by more than one person are treated as if they are owned by a single person, when such animals share the same facilities.

5/6/2 Animals owned for trade should become subject to the Zak.ah rate on articles of trade. Valuation has to be at selling market price.

5/6/3 Working animals, such as animals used in land plowing, irri•
gation and carrying are not part of zakatable assets.

5/6/4 Animals other than camels, cows and goats are not subject to Zak.ah payment, unless they are owned for trade. If such animals are used for production rather than trade they should not be included in zakatable assets.

5/6/5 When animal products such as milk and wool are owned for trade they should become subject to Zak.ah on articles oftrade.

5/6/6 Zakah is not payable on horses, mules, donkeys and all other animals used for work or adornment, unless owned for trade.

5/6/7 Zak.ah is not obligatory on chickens acquired for production, which  should  be treated  in the  same way as Mustaghallat (productive assets such as leased properties).  [see item 4/2]

5/6/8 Chickens, milk and stocks of animals are subject to Zak.ah on articles of trade when they are owned for trade purposes.

6. Liabilities

6/1  Classification of liabilities

Liabilities in financial  statements  comprise  items which  are not debts owed by the Institution in the strict sense of Shari'ah. Such items include for instance the capital of the company, the reserves and the profits. The debts included  under  the  item of liabilities comprise the following:



888





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

6/1/1 Non-current  (long term) liabilities which refer to debts that become due after one year. Such debts usually arise from pur• chase of fixed assets on debt, in addition to other long term entitlements.

6/1/2 Current (short term) liabilities which refer to debts that become due within one year.

6/2  Debts owed by the institution

6/2/1  Ifthe debts owed by the Institution have arisen from obtaining current zakatable assets for the purpose of trade they should be deducted from the Zakah base.

6/2/2 Ifthe debts owed by the Institution have arisen from obtaining non-zakatable fixed assets, they should not be deducted from the Zakah base.

6/2/3 When it is difficult to know the amount of debt that has arisen from acquiring zakatable assets, the ratio ofzakatable assets to total assets should be used for assessment of such debt which has to be  deducted  from  the  Zakah base.  If, for instance, zakatable assets constitute 40% of total assets, 40% of total debts should be deducted from the Zakah base.

6/2/4 If the debt owed by the Institution has arisen from a Shari'ah• banned practice such as borrowing with interest, unpaid in• terests should not be deducted from zakatable assets, because impermissible commitments cannot lead to a Shari'ah-recogniz• able debt.

6/3  Applications relating to current liabilities in the items of financial statements
6/3/1  Current  accounts:  The balances of current  accounts should be deducted from the zakatable assets of the Institutions with which such accounts are deposited. Similarly, the principal as well as the profits of investment accounts should be deducted from the zakatable assets of the Institutions  entrusted  with



889





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

investing these accounts to the benefit of their  holders.  In the case of investment accounts the share of the Mudarib or agency fees earned by the Institution shall  be excluded from the deductable amount.

6/3/2 Creditors: This item refers to the amounts payable to the creditors of the institution during the Zakah year.  Such amounts which usually arise from obtaining goods, equipment, or services on debt should be deducted from zakatable assets.

6/3/3 Creditors of sold goods of Salam: It refers to those who pur• chased goods from the Institution  through  Salam and have not yet received them. The goods constitute a debt, because they have not yet been delivered, and therefore, the amount of Salam capital should be deducted from the zakatable assets.

6/3/4 Creditors ofsold goods oflstisna'a: The goods constitute a debt because the Institution has entered in a commitment to make them, and it is yet to do so.  Hence, such goods shall become subject to the rulings indicated in item 6/3/6.

6/3/5 Creditors of purchased goods of lstisna'a: This indicates the debt commitment of the Institution when it purchases goods through lstisna'a. The balance ofthis item should be deducted from Zakatable assets.

6/3/6 Payment papers: It includes bills and order bonds issued to importers  of deferred goods and services, or bills and order bonds issued for interest free borrowing;  if such papers will fall due in the next Zakah year. Such assets should be deducted from zakatable assets.

6/3/7 Short term loans and overdraft accounts shall be subject to the rulings indicated in item 6/3/2.

6/3/8 Accrued expenses: It is the expenses which relate to the current period and is to be paid during the next period. Such expenses should be deducted from zakatable assets.



890





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

6/3/9 Prepaid income: If such income relates to services which have not yet been provided no Zak.ah has to be paid on the exact portion of it which relates to the undelivered services; because such income is not finally owned, and the Ijarah (hiring) contract for provision ofthe services could be terminated on occurrence of an excuse or aforce majeure situation. Consequently prepaid income  for undelivered  services should  be deducted  from zakatable assets.

Nevertheless, cash amounts  of earnest money forwarded  on conclusion of written or verbal exchange-based (Mu'awadah) contracts  are considered to be owned by the Institution  or the company,  and Zak.ah has to be paid on them even if the goods in question have not been delivered. That is to say such amounts should not be deducted from zakatable assets.

6/3/10Due taxes: Tax amounts that relate to the current period, but has to be paid in the next period  should be deducted from zakatable assets.

6/3/11Security amounts paid by clients to guarantee fulfillments of their commitments  and settlement of periodical bills should be deducted from zakatable assets.

6/3/12Minority rights which refer to other shareholders' equity in the subsidiary, and which appear in the consolidated financial statements should become subject to the rulings indicated in item 4/2/5.

7. Provisions

7/1  Definition of provisions

Provisions represent the amounts retained from revenues at the end of the financial period so as to cater for probable shortage of assets, or to meet imprecisely determined or unforeseen commitments of the Institution. Since provisions are estimates of probable loss amounts and unspecified commitments, they have to be totally or partially returned back to the profit and loss account (income statement), if



891





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

the debt is collected or the commitment is fulfilled, or ifthe provision amount is more than it should have been.

7/2 Classification ofprovisions

Regarding provisions, the following should be observed:

7/2/1  Provisions relating to fixed assets: Such provisions are nonde• ductible from Zakah assets, since fixed assets are not part of the Zakah base.

7/2/2 Provisions relating to current assets: Since Zakah is calculable on the basis of market value, provisions relating to current assets are not considered as part of liabilities to be deducted from zakatable assets. If, for any reason, current  assets are valued for Zakah calculation at book value which happens to be more than  exchange value, the difference between book value and  market value pertinent  to provisions should be deducted from Zakatable assets.

7/2/3 Provisions relating  to liabilities: Liability provisions which aim to cover imprecisely determined  commitments  of the company such as provisions for: end of service benefits, staff leaves, taxation,  and indemnities,  shall be reasonable so as not  to become  secret reserves. Whenever  exaggeration  in such provisions is discovered, the excess amount  should be removed.

7/2/4 In the cases when the provision  is deductable  from assets interest should not be deducted if it happens to be involved in it. Deduction from assets in this case should include only the Sharf'ah-recognizable commitment.  It should, however, be noted that interest bearing deposits and loans are strictly prohibited by Sharfah.  [see item 6/2/3]

7/3 Applications relating to provisions

7/3/1 Provision for redemption of pre-operating expenses: It is the cumulative amount of the redeemed part of pre-operating ex• penses. This provision is not deductable from zakatable assets.



892





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

7/3/2  Provision for deterioration  in the value of investments in shares purchased for acquisition: This provision  is meant to cater for price decline in financial markets,  or book value, below cost; in case of valuation at cost or market value whichever  the less. Such provision is not deductable from  zakatable assets.

7/3/3  Provision for perishable  or slow moving goods: In case of slow moving  goods the provision  is to cover probable  declines in value due to expiry,  obsolescence  of type, or slow marketing. This provision  is not deductable from zakatable assets.

7/3/4  Provision for probable declines in the prices of goods or financial papers: This provision is usually made to cater for declines which actually take place, and it is not deductable from Zakatable assets.

7/3/5  Provision for leaves: It is the amount deducted from revenues so as to cater for the commitment  of the institution to compensate staff for leave entitlements. This provision  is not  deductable from Zakatable assets.

7/3/6  Provision for end of service and retirement benefits or pension salary of staff: It refers to the amounts  deducted from revenues for meeting payment of such obligations. Such amounts are not deductable  from  Zakatable  assets because  they  are  allocated for disbursement, but not yet disbursed. They can be deducted only when they are actually paid or when they become due for payment  during the current year, but not yet settled.

7/3/7 Provision  for indemnity: It refers to the  estimated amounts deducted from  revenues  in  order  to  cater  for a confirmed commitment relating to an initial legal verdict  (before appeal) stipulating the  payment of a specific  amount as indemnity to a certain  party.  Such provision  is estimated  according to the  amounts   mentioned in  the  verdict,  and  it  should  not be deducted from  Zakatable  assets until  it becomes  due for payment by virtue  of a final verdict.

7/3/8  Provision for maintenance: It is an amount allocated for spend•
ing, but not yet spent. It is not deductable from Zakatable assets.



893





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

7/3/9 Provision for insurance offixed assets: This provision refers to the amounts charged to the revenues of the company to sub• stitute the premiums that will be paid to insurance companies. This provision is estimated as per the amounts of its compo• nents. It should not be deducted from Zakatable assets because it comprises amounts that have been allocated for spending, but still owned by the company.

7/3/10  Provision for decrease in the price of currencies: It is the amount charged to the revenues of the company to cater for probable decline of the prices of foreign currencies against the price of the currency used in the financial statements of the company. It is assessed on the basis of the difference between the two prices (purchase price and market price). Such provision  is not deductable from zakatable assets, because what matters is the prevailing exchange price at the time ofvaluation of Zakatable assets.

7/3/11  Provision for taxes: It refers to the estimated amounts deducted from the revenues ofthe company for settlement ofthe unpaid taxes of the current year. Such provision is assessed  according to size of activity during the current financial period, besides the tax level in the previous financial periods. This provision
is not deductable from Zakatable assets.

8. Reserves

8/1  Definition of reserves

Reserves are amounts deducted from profits by virtue oflaw (statutory reserves), or as required by articles of association of the Institution, or on the basis of a decision by the general assembly (voluntary reserves). Reserves provide necessary funds for many purposes such as future expansion, facing probable losses, distribution  of profits in the years when no profits are realized, and distribution of the accumulated amounts of the reserves when they are no longer needed.



894





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

8/2  Nature and Shari'ah status (Hulan) of reserves

8/2/1 Both  types  of  reserves  (statutory  and  voluntary)  are  not deductable  from  zakatable assets,  because in Sharf'ah they are not  considered to  constitute  debt obligations owed by the company, although it is referred to under liabilities. Since reserves are owned by the company they should be subject to Zakah as part of Zakatable assets, in case of applying the net assets method of Zakah assessment.

8/2/2 In spite of the fact that the capital account and the issuance premium  provide sources of funding for the company they are not considered to be part of its debt obligations, even if capital is usually referred to under liabilities. Therefore, capi• tal account and issuance premium  are not deductable  from Zakatable assets.

8/3  Applications relating to reserves

8/3/1  Revaluation reserve (capital reserves): It results from revaluation of fixed assets at current market value,  and since fixed assets are not subject to Zakah, such reserve is not deductable from Zakatable assets.

8/3/2 Income reserve: It refers to that part  of distributable  profit which is retained by an administrative decision in provision for future need. It is not a debt obligation owed by the Institution, and therefore should not be deducted from Zakatable assets.

8/3/3 Reserve of profits earned  from share purchasing  operation (institution's treasury shares): This reserve results from the act ofthe Institution when it purchases and sells its own shares. It is not deductable from Zakatable assets, since it is part of the profits.

8/3/4 Reserve of profits declared for distribution: It refers to the profit declared by the board of directors, but the decision for its distribution has not yet been taken.



895





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

8/3/5 Reserve of retained profits:  This reserve comprises the profits earmarked for transference to forthcoming years. It constitutes one type of income  reserves,  and  is not  deductable  from Zakatable assets.

9. Eight Heads of Zakah Disbursement

The heads of Zakah disbursement  are the eight categories specified by the Verse which  states: {"As-Sadaqat (here it means Zakat)  are only for  the Fuqara'  (poor),  and Al-Masakin  (the poor)  and those employed to collect (the funds); andfor to attract the hearts ofthose who have been inclined (towards Islam); and tofree the captives; and for those in debt; and for Allah's Cause (i.e., for Mujahidun - those fighting in the holy wars),  and for  the wayfarer (a traveller who is cut offfrom everything) a duty imposed by Allah. And Allah is All• Knower, All-Wise."}Shari'ah Supervisory Boards of the institutions may specify the meaning and appropriate way of application, for each one of these categories.

IO. Rulings Relating to Zakah Disbursement

10/1 The  Zakah payer  (institution)  cannot  discharge of his Zakah commitment by relieving his debtors from their debt obligations. This, however, does not mean that Zakah recipients cannot repay their debts out of the Zakah amounts which they receive from their creditors, provided that such arrangement does not involve collusion or a pre-stated condition.

10/2 In principle, Zakah is to be paid as soon as it is due, yet it can be delayed - for not more than one year - due to shortage of funds, or if its distribution is made according to a certain time schedule, or for any other obvious interest.

10/3  Institutions should establish a special fund or account for Zakah.

10/4 In principle,  Zakah should  be spent on its eight heads,  yet if
need arises Zakah funds can be utilized in investment projects.

(4) [AI-Tawbah (Repentance): 60]



896





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

However,  such  projects  should,  at  the  end,  be  owned  by  the Zakah  recipients,  or put under the supervision of the competent Sharf'ah  body   entrusted  with   collection   and   distribution  of Zakah. Nevertheless,  investment of Zakah  funds should  be after fulfilling the urgent needs of Zakah recipients, and on availability of sufficient safeguards  against losses.

10/5  Zakah does not cease to be valid by prescription.

I 0/6 Zakah can be paid before its due time, subject to specific conditions on which Sharf'ah boards should be consulted.

I 0/7 Zakah can permissibly  be paid in terms  of the equivalent value of the subject commodity.
10/8  Zakah  should  not necessarily  cover all the eight heads of its dis•
bursement.  It can permissibly be confined to some of them.

10/9  Zakah funds can be transferred from place of payment to another place due to an obvious interest to be judged by the Shari'ah boards of the institutions.





























897





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

11. Nisab and Zakah Rate for Livestock (An'am)

11/1 Nisab and Zak.ah rate on camels



From                 To                           Obligatory Zak.ah Rate
1        --


4
----I


Nothing
5                       9                                               1  goat
10     ---; .....--  14     -       2goats
15      --
19     -

3 goats
20                     24                                             4 goats
25     --

35              Bint Makhad camel (at the second year of age)
36                     45
Bint Labun camel (at the third year of age)
46     --  60
-- Hiqqah camel (at the fourth year ofage)
61                        75                     Jaza'ah camel (at the fifth year ofage)
76    -- 90     -

2 BintLabun
91                       120                                           2Hiqqah
121                    129                                        3 BintLabun

130

....,     
139    -

1 Hiqqah + 2 Bint Labun
140                    149                              2 Hiqqah + 1 Bint Labun

150

_,   
159     -

3 Hiqqah
160                    169                                        4BintLabun

170
----
179     -

1  Hiqqah + 3 Bint Labun
180                      189                                  2 Hiqqah + 2 Bint Labun
+ 1  Bint Labun
190                    199                               3 Hiqqah
200                   209                             4 Hiqqah or 5 Bint Labun
d      d
210                   219                              1 Hiqqah + 4 Bint Labun

220
--  229    -

2 Hiqqah + 3 Bint Labun
230                   239                              3 Hiqqah + 2 Bint Labun
240                   249                              4 Hiqqah + 1 Bint Labun

For more than 249, one Hiqqah for every 50 camels and one Bint-labun for every 40 camels.






898





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

11/2 Nisab and Zak.ah rate on cows

From             To                                Obligatory Zakah Rate

1                              29
..;1--

Nothing
30                39                      Tabee'a or Tabee'ah (at 2nd year of age)
..;i--
40                59    ~~
Musinnah (at 3rd year of age)
60                69                                   2 Tabee'a or 2 Tabee'ah

70                79                            Musinnah + Tabee'a or Tabee'ah
t
80                89                                           2Musinnah

90                99
1--
100               109

3 Tabee'a or 3 Tabee'ah

~ Musinnah + 2 Tabbee'a or 2 Tabee'ah
1--
110              119                             2 Musinnah + Tabee'a or Tabee'ah

120               129                       3 Musinnah or 4 Tabee'a or 4 Tabee'ah

For more than 129, one Tabee'a or one Tabee'ah for every 30 cows and one
Musinnah for every 40 cows.

11/3 Nisab and Zakah rates on goats

From                         To
1            ---  39
40                              120


I                                 Obligatory Zakah  Rate

Nothing

1  goat

121

201

.
---

200

399

2 goats

3 goats
400                            499
4 goats

For more than  499, one goat for every 100 goats.


12. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 30 Dhul-Qa'dah 1429 A.H., corresponding to 28 November  2008 A.D.







899
