




Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted the draft of the Standard on Zakah in its meeting No.  (22) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 28-30 Dhul-Qadah
1429 A.H., corresponding to 26-28 November 2008 A.D.













































900





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (13) held on 26-30 Sha'ban 1425 A.H., corresponding to  10-15  October 2004 A.D., in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, The Sharf'ah Board decided to issue a Shari'ah standard on Zak.ah.

On 1  Ramadan 1425 A.H., corresponding to 16 October 2004 A.D., the Secretariat General decided to commission a Sharfah consultant to prepare a study on Zak.ah.

A joint committee composed from Sharfah Committees (1) and (2) was held on Thursday 8 Rabi' I, 1427 A.H., corresponding to 6 April 2006 A.D., in Makkah Al-Mukarramah. In that meeting the committee discussed the study, cleared it, and asked the consultant to introduce necessary changes in the light ofthe observations and suggestions made in the meeting.

In its meeting No. (17) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, on 26 Shawwal
- 1  Dhul-Qa'dah 1427 A.H., corresponding to 18-23 November 2006 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the amendments made by the joint committee and introduced the changes that it deemed necessary.

The Secretarial General of AAOIFI held a public hearing in the King•
dom of Bahrain on 18 Safar 1428  A.H., corresponding  to 8 March 2008
A.D. More than 30 participants  attended the session as representatives of central banks, institutions, and accounting firms. The session was also at• tended by Sharfah scholars, university teachers and other interested par• ties. Several observations were made in the session, and duly responded to by the members ofthe Sharf'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2).

In its meeting No. (18) held on 12-16 Jumada II, 1428 A.H., correspond•
ing to 27 June  - 1   July 2007 A.D.,  in AI-Madinah Al-Munawwarah,  the



901





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah

Shari'ah Board discussed the amendments proposed by the public hearing, and introduced the changes that it deemed necessary.

In its meeting No. (20) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on 4-8 Safar
1429 A.H.,  corresponding  to  11-15  February 2008 A.D.,  the  Shari'ah Board discussed the changes introduced by the joint meeting of Sharf'ah Committees (1) and (2), and introduced necessary changes.

In  its meeting No.  (22)  held in the Kingdom of Bahrain,  on 28-30
Dhul-Qa'dah 1429 A.H., corresponding to 26-28 November 2008 A.D., the Shari'ah  Board adopted the Standard after discussing it and introducing necessary changes.








































902





Shari'ah Standard No.  (35): Zakah





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


It is impossible to imagine a debt arising from commodities purchased through  Salam, because the capital (price) has to be paid in advance. The Salam buyer has to pay Zakah on the Salam capital which he receives.










































903





Shari'ah Standard No. (35): Zakah





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Method of Net Investment Assets

Paid-up Capital+ Reserves+ Provisions which have not been deducted from assets + Retained Profits + Net Income + Liabilities which are not payable during the current financial period as at the date of the Balance Sheet + Total installments ofthe coming financial period + net fixed assets and additional investments which are not for trade such as real estate for leasing + carried forward losses.






























(5) For easy reference, most ofthe terms have been defined in the text ofthe rulings indicated in this standard.



904






















Shari'ah Standard No. (36)



Impact of Contingent
Incidents on Commitments












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                             909
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................        910

1. Scope of the Standard..............................................................................       910
2. Definition of Contingent Incidents........................................................       910
3. Types of Contingent Incidents................................................................        910
4. Contingencies Leading to Amendment  of the Contract                           910
5. Contingencies Which Constitute External Reasons for Termination
of the Contract..........................................................................................       911
6. Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................       913
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        914
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        915
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard.....................................       917
Appendix (c):  Definitions.............................................................................   918
























907








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to illustrate the contingent incidents which come suddenly upon commitments and cause deviation from stipulated results.








































909





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (36): Impact  of Contingent  Incidents on Commitments





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers the contingent incidents encountered in honoring the  commitments  that  stem  from  application  of Islamic modes  of financing and investment by Islamic financial institutions  (Institution/ Institutions).It also covers the effects ofsuch incidents on commitments.

The Standard, however,  does not cover defects of will or the conducts that result from mutual consent of the two parties.

2. Definition  of Contingent Incidents

Contingent  incidents in this standard refer to those incidents which occur suddenly and cause significant influence on commitments  that are properly  stipulated.  Therefore,  contingent  incidents are different from defects of will, which exist since the time of signing the contract, although their  impact  occurs later on. Contingent  incidents  are also different from termination  of commitments  on mutual consent of the two parties or as per the desire ofany ofthem; when a party is entitled to such right by virtue of the contract.

3. Types of Contingent Incidents

From the standpoint of its influence, a contingent incident can be either of the type that necessitates amendments  in the contract, or the type which constitutes an external reason for termination ofthe contract.

4. Contingencies  Leading to Amendment of the Contract

The impact ofsuch contingencies is confinedto necessitating amendments in the contract rather than leading to its complete termination. Practical examples of such contingencies include the following among others:

(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



910





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (36): Impact  of Contingent  Incidents on Commitments

4/1  Levy of custom duties or taxes after signing the contract. Such inci• dent affects the commitment of the party who has to bear the new obligations by virtue oflaw or as per the stipulations ofthe contract.

4/2 Change in the prices of the commodities  used in implementation of a contract in a way that subjects the contractor  to serious harm. Actual harm  in this case can be removed  through  reconciliation, arbitration  or legal arrangements.

4/3  Prevention ofimportation ofthe goods to be delivered in fulfillment of a Murabahah or Ijarah contract. The actual harm caused to the client or the Institution can, in this case, be removed by resort to reconciliation, arbitration or law.

4/4 Change in laws leading to more financial commitments  to be borne by one of the two parties. Determination ofthe party who shall bear the additional burden can be reached by resort to law or as per the stipulations ofthe contract.

5. Contingencies  Which Constitute External Reasons for Termination of the Contract

This type ofcontingencies leads to termination ofcommitments without intervention of any of the two parties. Bearing of the consequences in this case is to be assigned to the competent party, as when an owner has to bear the consequences relating to what he owns. Examples of such contingencies include, among others:

5/1  When delivery becomes impossible or useless

In this case the fulftllment  of the commitment becomes impossible or ofno use; as when the commitment to supply the requirements of a conference could not be fulfilled before holding the conference. In such case the commitment shall become null and void if:

5/1/1 Failure to honor the commitment is absolutely inevitable.

5/1/2 Failure to honor  the commitment originates  from objective rather than personal reasons.

5/1/3 Failure to honor the commitment is caused by an external party.



911





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (36): Impact  of Contingent  Incidents on Commitments

5/2  Total or partial damage of the object of commitment

Ifthe object of commitment  is damaged before being delivered to the committing party, the loss should be borne by the committed party. Similarly,  when  the commitment  object is completely damaged due to an act of the committing party, that party  should bear the loss. In case of partial damage of the object of commitment  before actual or legal delivery to the committing party, and if the damage is caused by a heavenly factor (Sabab Samawi} which the committed partly can by no means avoid, the committing party should have the right of option.

5/3  Entitlement to the object of commitment

Ifthe object of commitment turned  out to be owned by someone else other the committed  party, the committing  party  becomes entitled to compensation.  If the object  of commitment is partly  owned by someone  else the commitment in that part  becomes null and void, and the committing  party  shall have the right of option with regard to  accepting  or  declining  the  remaining  part  of the  commitment object. The committing  party  may choose to accept the remaining part  as part  of his compensation or he may terminate  the contract due to fragmentation of delivery.

5/4 Termination of commitment  due to excuses

When  the  emergence  of an  incidental  excuse  in  Ijarah  leads  to abnormal  harm,  the  harmed  party  has the  right  to terminate  the contract. The party who encounters the incident may also terminate the contract  if his excuse is obvious. If acceptability of the excuse is doubtful  the issue may be resolved by mutual  agreement,  or resort to law. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (9) on Ijarah or ljarah Muntahiah Bittamleek; and Shari'ah Standard No.  (34) on Hiring of Persons]

5/5  Jawa'ih (calamities)

The term Jawa'ih refers to any incident (other than human acts) which cannot be avoided even if known.  The effects of such incidents are • originally - noticeable in selling offruits and other agricultural products, where the occurrence of an incident of this type leads to discounting the



912





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (36): Impact  of Contingent  Incidents on Commitments

price in proportion to the damage in the product. An example of this can also be seen in the "ljarah Muntahia Bittamleek Contract'. In this case the amount of rent in excess of the normal rent of similar property is  dropped when ownership  cannot be transferred to the lessor for a reason which the lessee cannot stop. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (9) on ljarah or ljarah Muntahia Bittamleek, item 8/8]

6. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 17 Rabi' I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 15
March 2009 A.D.










































913





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (36): Impact  of Contingent  Incidents on Commitments





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted the Standard on Impact of Contingent Incidents on Commitments in its meeting No. (23) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on Thursday- Saturday 15-17 Rabi' I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 12-13 March 2009 A.D.











































914





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (36): Impact  of Contingent  Incidents on Commitments





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (14) held on 21-23 Rabi' I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 30 April - 2 May 2005 A.D., in Dubai (U. A. E.), the Sharf'ah Board decided to issue a Shari'ah Standard on Impact of Contingent Incidents on Commitments.

On 29 Jumada I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 6 July 2005 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee decided to commission a consultant to prepare a study on Impact of Contingent Incidents on Commitments.

The study was discussed in a joint meeting of the Shari'ah Standards
Committees (1) and (2), held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 8-9 Rabi' I,
1427 A.H., corresponding to 6-7 April 2006 A.D. The Joint Committee then advised the consultant to introduce the necessary changes in the Standard, in the light of the discussions and observations of the meeting.

The revised draft ofthe Standard was discussed in another joint meeting of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2), held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on Thursday 21 Sha'ban 1427 A.H., corresponding to 14 September
2006 A.D. The consultant was again advised to introduce changes in the
Standard as per the discussions and observations ofthe meeting.

In its meeting No.  (20) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on 4-8 Safar
1429 A.H., corresponding to 11-15 February 2008 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the Changes in the Standard which had been made by the joint meeting of Shari'ah Standards Committees  (1) and (2), and introduced changes that it deemed necessary.

The Secretarial General ofAAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom ofBahrain on 24 Safar 1430 A.H., corresponding to 19 February2009 A.D.



915





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (36): Impact  of Contingent  Incidents on Commitments

More than 30 participants attended the session as representatives of central banks, Institutions, and accounting firms. The session was also attended by Shari'ah scholars, university teachers and other interested parties. Several observations were made in the session, and duly responded to by the members of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2).

In its meeting No.  (23) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on Thursday
- Saturday 15-17 Rabi' I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 12-15 March 2009
A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed the amendments that had been suggested in the public hearing, introduced changes that it deemed necessary and adopted the Standard.









































916





Sharf'ah Standard No. (36): Impact of Contingent Incidents on Commitments





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


• Permissibility of amending the commitment  to absorb the impacts of contingent incidents is based on the fact that in such cases Muslims should strive for appropriate disposition without rushing to termination of the commitment. This rule is adopted by the various schools of Fiqh with regard to external incidents which take place without the interven• tion of any of the two parties.
■  The ruling that the commitment shall become null and void if its ful•
fillment has become useless is based on the fact that implementation of a useless commitment is an act of futility, while there is no room for futility in Shari'ah legislation as indicated by AI-Shatibi and others.
■  The basis for the ruling that commitment shall become ineffective when
the object of the contract turns out to be owned by someone else other than the committed party, is that unlawful seizure is unrecognizable as a basis ofownership. The Prophet (peace be upon him) is reported to have said: An extorter is indebted with what he takes until he returns it back•
• The basis for the rulings relating to Jawa'ih (calamities) is the Hadith (Prophetic tradition)  which states:  "The Prophet (peace be upon  him) hasforbidden Bay' al-Sinin (sale ofagricultural producefor many years to come), and permitted  value discounts on calamities".  Therefore, rulings can be derived from this Hadith for similar cases when the object of the contract is lost due to an inevitable incident





(2) Related by Ahmad in his "Musnad"; "Ashab Al-Sunan'; and Al-Hakim in his "Mustadrak",
quoting Samrah, and "AI-Fath AL-Kabir" [2: 232].
(3) This Hadith has been related by Muslim,  Abu Dawud and Al-Nasa'i:  "Majma' Al• Zawa 'id" [1: 703].



917





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (36): Impact  of Contingent  Incidents  on Commitments





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Contingencies  Relating to Legal Competence

Incidental change in personal traits which leads to loss of competence and induce mal-disposition.

Defects of Will

Hidden matters which coincide with the inception of the contract and entail amendments of rights and duties when they occur.

Al-Jawa'ih

Catastrophes which hit the produce and damage it partially or totally, such as storms and the like.
Contingent Incidents  (force majeure)

Abnormal  incidents  which justify procedures  that  are not  allowed under normal  circumstances. Examples of such incidents include wars, internal unrest, and natural catastrophes." Describing such incidents as "heavenly" is to indicate the inability of human  beings to avoid them. Examples of such incidents include,  for instance,  insanity forgetfulness and unconsciousness,

Heavenly Incidents

Incidents which human beings cannot avoid. It includes also the strict directives of Shari'ah in which the slaves of Allah, the Almighty, have no room for choice.6

(4) "Mu'jam Mustalahat AI-Shari'ah Wa Al-Qanun", Dr. Abdul-Wahid Karam (P. 676). (5) "Mu'jam Mustalahat Usul Al-Fiqh, Dr. Qutb Mustafa Sano (P 305).



918





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (36): Impact  of Contingent  Incidents on Commitments

Istihqaq (Entitlement)

Occurrence  of the fact that someone else has the full right of total or partial ownership on the sold property."° It can also be defined as existence of other verifiable claims of right on the property which one party pledged to deliver to the other.(












































(6) "AL-Khiyar Wa Atharuh  Fi AI-'Uqud" (P. 478).
(7) "M'jam Mustalahat Al-Shari'ah  Wa Al-Qanun"  (P. 37).



919

























Shari'ah Standard No. (37)




Credit Agreement












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                             925
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................        926

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               926
2. Definition of Credit Facilities                                                                  926
3. Types of Credit Facilities                                                                          927
4. Shari'ah Status of Offering Credit Facilities                                             930
5. Sharf'ah Rulings on Credit Facilities                                                        930
6. Obtaining Guarantees on Credit Facilities............................................       934
7. Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................       934
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        935
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        936
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard.....................................       938
Appendix (c):  Definitions..............................................................................        940























923








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to indicate the various types of credit facilities and their most important applications as well as the returns and commissions which result from them. The Standard also covers the Sharf'ah rulings pertaining  to credit facilities so as to be observed by Islamic financial institutions (Institution/Institutions).






























(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



925





Sharf'ah   Stan dard No.   (37):   Credit Agreement





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard covers credit facilities and the returns and commissions arising from them, whether  such facilities are practiced between  the Institution and its clients or between the institution and other institutions.

2. Definition  of Credit Facilities

2/ 1  The term credit refers to the financial transaction according to which one of the two parties becomes indebted to the other. Indebtedness in such transactions  can arise at the beginning  of the transaction, and this is known as direct cash credit such as loans and discounting of commercial papers. Instead, indebtedness could be only probable at the end of the transaction, and that is incidental credit, such as bank suretyship, letters of guarantee, bills of acceptance, and letters of documentary credit. The term "credit facilities" is used to denote credit in both cases. The concepts of credit and credit facilities are more comprehensive than the concept of financing which relates to the case of actual deferment of one of the two transacted objects.

2/2 According to this standard, credit facilities in institutions  can be
divided into the following types:

2/2/1  Cash facilities: This type includes the transactions in which the Institution presents funds, whether in the form of cash - as is the case in Qard Hasan  (benevolent loan), Musharakah and Mudarabah; or in the form of an asset or usufruct  - as is the case in Murabahah  and lease financing.  It should be noticed here that Musharakah and Mudarabah do not result in a debt owed by the client except in case oftransgression or negligence.

2/2/2 Incidental facilities: This type includes the transactions which result in an incidental commitment  owed by the Institution such as suretyship and letters ofguarantee.



926





Sharf'ah   Stan dard No.   (37):   Credit Agreement

2/3 Transactions that entail instant delivery of the transacted objects are not considered  as part of credit facilities.

2/4 The decision  of granting credit facilities:

It refers to the approval of the Institution to enter into a credit facility with a specific client. The approved facility will be subject to a specific financial  limit  that  can be used  during  a specific period  of validity and  subject to a certain  date of maturity.  The  credit  facility would also comprise specific conditions relating  to guarantees,  method of repayment and regulatory requirements. The decision of granting the facility is usually issued in the form of a letter addressed  from the In• stitution  to the client, indicating that the letter does not constitute any commitment from the part of the Institution unless transactions are actually commenced. Similar to letters ofgranting facilities, letters for renewal or extension  of the period of already approved  facilities also carry the same conditions.

2/5  Using credit facilities

It refers  to commencement of the  client to utilize  the  facility  by submitting a request for a letter of guarantee or a letter of credit,  or making a pledge to purchase a commodity or hire an asset through the Institution.

3. Types of Credit Facilities

3/1  Types of traditional  credit facilities used by banks:

3/1/1  Loans

Loans refer to facilities payable  on a specific date agreed upon between the  traditional financial Institution and  the  client. Loans  can  be  extended  directly to  the  client,  or  through participation with  other  traditional financial Institutions,  or through acquisition of bonds issued by the client.

3/1/2 Overdraft

Overdraft is a facility which the traditional financial institution puts at the disposal of the client to draw from it on need, up to a specific limit and within  a given period.



927





Sharf'ah   Stan dard No.   (37):   Credit Agreement

3/1/3 Discounted papers

Discounted papers comprise commercial papers and bonds to order discounted in the traditional financial institution.

3/1/4 Issued credit cards

In this traditional form ofcredit facility, the indebtedness which can arise from using the credit card is determined for each client within a certain limit, and he can repay it in installments along with the interest.

3/1/5 Documentary credits

Documentary credits are among the facilities which traditional financial Institutions  extend to their clients. In this case the Institution  assumes the commitment to pay to beneficiaries the value ofthe credits opened for its client, whether the value of such credits is due on sight of the documents  or on a date thereafter.

3/1/6 Bank acceptances

This type of facilities which traditional  financial Institutions offer to their clients entails a commitment from the Institu• tion, for the benefit of a client or for its own benefit, to pay to beneficiaries the value of the accepted papers when they are due.

3/1/7 Bank guarantees

Traditional  financial Institutions  offer this type of facility to their clients. In such facility the bank, upon request ofits client, undertakes to pay to a third party the amounts indicated in the guarantees, on request and within a specific period.

3/1/8 Foreign exchange operations

Foreign exchange operations  constitute  a traditional facility offered to clients in deferred contracts  of buying and selling foreign currency.



928





Sharf'ah   Stan dard No.   (37):   Credit Agreement

3/2 Types of Islamic credit facilities used by institutions

3/2/1 Murabahah and Musawamah

Murabahah and Musawamah are two types ofsale transactions which constitute methods offinancing used by Islamic financial institutions to cater for client needs for owning moveable as well as immovable assets. Contrary to Musawamah, in Murabahah the cost incurred by the Institution for obtaining the good must be indicated [see Shari'ah Standard No. (8) on Murabahah]

3/2/2 Mudarabah

Mudarabah is a method  of financing which institutions use for financing various  economic  activities. According to this method the institution enters the deal as the partner who subscribes  the funds  (Rab al-Mal) while the other  partner (Mudarib) subscribes the work and performs the managerial duties. The two parties agree, within the contract, on a specific method for profit sharing, while the entire loss has to be borne by Rab al-Mal, unless it is due to transgression  or negligence of the Mudarib.  [see Shari'ah Standard No.  (21) on Financial Papers: Shares and Bonds]

3/2/3 Permanent Musharakah and diminishing Musharakah

Musharakah is a method of financing in which the institution joins the client as a shareholder in the capital ofa certain project or operation. In this case the two parties share the profits and losses according to a predetermined  method  specified in the contract.

3/2/4 Operational-cum-financing Ijarah

It is a method used for financing clients' needs for usufructs and assets. According to this method the institution purchases the assets and rents them to clients for specific periods, against periodical amounts ofrent stipulated in the contract. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (9) on Ijarah and Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek]



929





Sharf'ah   Stan dard No.   (37):   Credit Agreement

3/2/5 lstisna'a

Istisna'a is a method through  which the institutions provide finance to their clients.  In this case the institution  assumes the  commitment  of manufacturing the  equipment  or  the good, or constructing  the buildings or the different types of capital assets according to the  specifications  agreed upon. The institution which provides finance in this manner has the right to sign a Parallel lstisna'a contract with another party to manufacture  the asset in question.

3/2/6 Salam

Salam  is  a method  of financing which institutions  use for extending finance to owners of farms  and merchants  who want to spend on their business as well as on their personal needs. Under this mode of financing the Institution has the right to arrange Salam with another party through a parallel Salam contract.

3/2/7 Other financing operations

Finance can also be extended to clients through other financing operations which include among others: Qard Hasan, customer overdraft balances, letters of guarantee and letters of credit

4. Shari'ah Status of Offering Credit Facilities
The decision to offer a credit facility and the facilityagreement are considered as means of mutual understanding and exchange of non-binding promises for entering into transactions. The Shari'ah status of actual utilization of the facilities depends on the type of contract to be used

5. Shari'ah Rulings on Credit Facilities

5/1  It is impermissible to use any of the traditional facilities mentioned in item 3/1 if it involves interest or would lead to an interest-bearing loan as is the case in guarantees and uncovered credits, or it would result in deferment of one of the two transacted  objects as is the case in  currency  exchange contracts.  [see  Shari'ah  Standard  No.



930





Sharf'ah   Stan dard No.   (37):   Credit Agreement

(14) on Documentary  Credit; Sharf'ah Standard No. (2) on Debit, Charge and Credit Cards; and Shari'ah Standard No. (1) on Trading in Currencies]

5/2 The institution  is not committed to pay any compensation to the client on rejection of his application to utilize the approved facilities, whereas the client also is free to use the facilities within the specified period or not. When the client refrains from using the facilities, he is not committed to pay any compensation to the Institution.

5/3 Returns and commission on credit facilities

5/3/1  First type: Commissions and returns which arise before con•
tracting

5/3/1/1 Commission for credit study

The institution is permitted to take commission for the credit study it prepares internally or through an exter• nal party, so as to know the credit worthiness of the client and his ability to honor his commitments within the period agreed upon. Entitlement ofthe Institution to such commission is due to fact that the client has benefited from the  study regardless of whether  the study has led to acceptance or rejection of his request. The study shall become the property ofthe client who has the right to take it.

5/3/1/2 Commission for offering credit facilities

This commission refers to the amount which the In• stitution charges against allocating and specifying the limit of the facility. The institution  usually charges such  commission  whether  the  deal is finalized or not.  However,  it is impermissible  for the Institution to obtain commission for offering credit facilities, be• cause the mere indication ofwillingness to enter into a lending and borrowing transaction  does not justify remuneration.  [see item 2/4/2  of Shari'ah Standard No. (8) on Murabahah]



931





Sharf'ah   Stan dard No.   (37):   Credit Agreement

5/3/1/3 Commission for renewal or extension ofcredit facilities

This type ofcommission should be treated in the same way like commission for offering credit facilities.  [see item 5/3/1/2 above and Shari'ah Standard No. (8) on Murabahah]

5/3/1/4 Cost of preparing the contracts and forms pertaining to the transaction

5/3/1/4/1 The cost of preparing  the contracts  to be signed between  the Institution  and the  client should be shared between the two parties, unless the contract indicates otherwise. Such charge should be fair and commensurate with the actual work load so as not to comprise an implicit fee for commitment  or for offering the credit facility.

5/3/1/4/2 When Murabahah (or any other mode offinancing) is used through syndicated financing the arranging Institution has the right to charge arrangement fees which has to be borne  by the participants  of the syndication. [see items 2/4/3 and 2/4/4 of Shari'ah Standard No. (8) on Murabahah]

5/3/1/5 Cost of the feasibility study of the project

The institution has the right to charge the cost of the feasibility study it prepares, when the client requests such a study for his own interest, and the cost of the study is agreed upon beforehand. [see item 2/4/5 of Shari'ah Standard No. (8) on Murabahah]

5/3/1/6 Hamish Jiddiyyah (security deposit)

The institution  may charge the  seriousness margin which refers to an amount ofearnest money forwarded by the client at the stage of offering his binding pledge in Murabahah.  In case of retreatment  of the client



932





Sharf'ah   Stan dard No.   (37):   Credit Agreement

from  concluding  the  contract  the  amount  of actual harm  caused to the institution shall be deducted  from the  seriousness  margin.  [see  item  7/8/2 of Shari'ah Standard No.  (5) on Guarantees]

5/3/2 Second type: Commissions  and returns which arise on signing of the contract

5/3/2/1 Commit ment fee

The institution  should not charge the commitment  fee which relates to traditional  facilities of interest-bearing loans, whether in the case of direct loans or the indebted• current  (overdraft)  loans.  Such  fee which  traditional institutions charge to the client even ifhe has not used the facility, is also known as the "loan fee",  or the "indebted• current facility fee", or the "financing fee'. [see item 2/4/1 of Shari'ah Standard No. (8) on Murabahah]

5/3/2/2 'Arboun  (Earnest Money)

It is permissible  for the institution  to charge such ear• nest money which  constitutes part of the price paid in advance  in sale and  lease contracts. Such amount  is owned by the seller or the landlord  when the buyer or the tenant  uses his right  of terminating the contract. [see item 7/8/3  of Sharf'ah Standard No.  (5) on Guar• antees]

5/3/2/3 Guarantee return

The institution  should  not  obtain  any returns  on the guarantee  relating  to  documentary   credits, letters  of guarantee, and bank suretyship, except actual expenses, whereas it can obtain returns  for agency in documen• tary credits.  [see item 7 of Shari'ah Standard No.  (5) on Guarantees; and item 3/3 of Shari'ah Standard No. (14) on Documentary Credit]



933





Sharf'ah   Stan dard No.   (37):   Credit Agreement

5/3/2/4 Return on debt rescheduling

5/3/2/4/1 The institution should  not obtain returns against ex• tending the date of repayment  of debts in all credit facilities. It should charge only the actual expenses of the rescheduling transaction.  [see item 5/7 of Sharf'ah Standard No.  (8) on  Murabahah;  Shari'ah Standard No. (3) on Procrastinating Debtor, and item 3/3/1 of Shari'ah Standard No. (14) on Documentary Credit]

5/3/2/4/2Renewal and extension of facilities should be done by entering into new contracts, rather than by extending the duration of the ongoing ones.

6. Obtaining  Guarantees on Credit Facilities

The institution has the right to use permissible forms of guarantee in order to ascertain the fulfillment of the commitments of its client. [see item 3/4/1  of Shari'ah Standard No.  (14) on Documentary Credits, and item 4/1/1 of Shari'ah Standard No. (5) on Guarantees]

7. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 17 Rabi' I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 15
March 2009 A.D.
























934





Sharf'ah   Stan dard No.   (37):   Credit Agreement





Adoption of the Standard


The Sharf'ah  Board adopted the Standard  on Credit Agreement in its
meeting No. (23), held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on Thursday- Saturday
15-17 Rab I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 12-15 March 2009 A.D.













































935





Sharf'ah   Stan dard No.   (37):   Credit Agreement





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No. (14) held on 21-23 Rabi' I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 30 April - 2 May 2005 A.D., in Dubai (U. A. E.), the Shari'ah Board decided to issue a Sharf'ah Standard on Credit Agreement.

On 24 Jumada I, 1427 A.H., corresponding to 20 June 2006 A.D., the Secretariat General decided to commission a consultant to prepare a study on Credit Agreement.

The study was discussed in a joint meeting of the Shari'ah  Standards
Committees (1) and (2), held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on 19 Shawwal
1427 A.H., corresponding to 10 November 2006 A.D. The Joint Committee then  advised the  consultant  to  introduce  the necessary changes in the Standard, in the light ofthe discussions and observations ofthe meeting.

The revised draft of the Standard was discussed in another joint meeting of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2), held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on 15 Jumada I, 1428 A.H., corresponding to 31 May 2007 A.D. The consultant was again advised to introduce changes in the standard as per the discussions and observations ofthe meeting.

The draft of the standard was discussed once again in a joint meeting of the Sharf'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2), held in the State of Kuwait, on 21  Jumada I,  1428 A.H., corresponding to 7 June 2007 A.D. Further changes were introduced in the document in the light of the discussions and observations ofthe meeting.

In  its meeting  No.  (19) held  in  Makkah  Al-Mukarramah,  on  26•
30 Sha'ban 1428 A.H., corresponding to 8-12 September 2007 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the changes in the standard which had been made by the consultant and introduced changes that it deemed necessary.



936





Shar f'ah   Stan dar d N o.   (37):   C redi t A gr eem ent

In its meeting No.  (20), held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on 4-8 Safar
1429 A.H., correponding to 11-15 February 2008 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the  changes introduced  by the joint meeting of the  Sharf'ah Standard Committees (1) and (2), and introduced the changes which it deemed necessary.

The Secretarial General ofAAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 34 Safar 1430 A.H., corresponding to 19 February 2009 A.D. More than 30 participants attended the session as representatives of central banks, institutions,  and  accounting firms.  Shari'ah  scholars,  university teachers and other interested parties  also attended  the session. Several observations were made and duly responded to by the members of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2).

In its meeting No.  (23) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on Thursday
- Saturday 15-17 Rabi' I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 12-15 March 2009
A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the amendments that had been suggested in the public hearing, introduced changes which it deemed necessary and adopted the Standard.





























937





Sharf'ah   Stan dard No.   (37):   Credit Agreement





Appendix  (B)

The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Shari'ah Basis for Charging a Fee for Preparation of the Credit Study

The credit study is a detailed study on the financial and credit position of the client so  as to facilitate assessment of his credit worthiness and ability to honor commitments. According to Shari'ah, this task as such can constitute a remunerable service apart from the financing contract. The institution can even stipulate a condition that the study should be prepared by a third party. Charging the client for the credit study is also justified by the fact that the benefit from the study is shared between the financier and the financed party, rather than confined to the former only. The fee for the study should not necessarily be equal to the actual cost of its preparation, since it is a service which can be performed  independently within the contract. Therefore, the credit agreement fee is considered as a fee payable for the effort exerted in preparation of the study as an independent service, irrespective of its results.

In this regard, the Sharf'ah Board of Aayan Company for Leasing and Finance issued a Fatwa (Fatawa Aayan: 189), indicating permissibility of charging such fees. The text of that Fatwa runs as follows:
"When  the  clients of Aayan Company  wish to sign with Aayan Company permissible  investment  or financing contracts  through Mudarabah,  Musharakah  or any other mode of financing,  and if Aayan Company,  for that purpose,  needs to conduct  a study on the financial  status of these clients and their  legal eligibility for concluding  such contracts,  it is permissible  for Aayan Company to sign special contracts with these clients so that Aayan Company prepares the required  study. For preparation  of the study, Aayan Company may charge a fee to be paid by the clients on the basis of



938





Sharf'ah   Stan dard No.   (37):   Credit Agreement

the special contracts which should be completely separate from the financing and legal contracts  pertaining  to the deals in question. The prepared study should become the property of the client once he pays the cost of its preparation, and therefore Aayan Company should not deprive him the right of obtaining it. Aayan Company should handover the study to the client so that he can be able to use it in his deals with Aayan Company or with any other party".














































939





Sharf'ah   Stan dard No.   (37):   Credit Agreement





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Financing

Financing takes place only when one of the two objects of the transaction is  deferred such as loan,  discounting of bills,  simple credit, Murabahah, Salam  and Istisna'a. Financing may not take place in suretyships, letters of guarantee, letters of documentary credits and bank acceptances. Therefore, the term financing is more special than the term credit. That is to say, any financing  is credit, but any credit does not always lead to financing.

Indebted-Current

This is one ofthe traditional forms of extending loans to customers. In this case the customer (borrower) is given access to draw from an account opened for this purpose (the indebted-current account)  up to a certain maximum limit which constitutes the amount of the loan, and within a specific period. A maximum date will also be specified for repayment of the drawn amounts. Such account is usually made subject to the following terms:
■  The customer has to pay interest on the amounts he draws actually.
■  The customer should pay a commitment fee calculable as a percentage of the total amount of the loan. Such amount is paid in addition to in• terest and is considered as Riha (usury).
The indebted-current account differs from the direct loan in that interest in the case of the former is paid at the end of the transaction's period  In the indebted-current account also interest is calculable on the basis of the amounts that have been actually used by the customer (the debit balance).

Facility Limits

The maximum limit ofthe facility is the total amount ofthe facility that has been approved by the institution. Such amount is extended through a specific mode of financing (Murabahah,  ljarah, letter of guarantee,  documentary



940





Sharf'ah   Stan dard No.   (37):   Credit Agreement

credit ....etc.). It constitutes the maximum exposure limit for the institution with regard to the specific client.

Credit Policy
Credit policy refers to the precautionary  measures  adopted  by the Institution with the aim of safeguarding its funds in the light of rules and regulations and in view ofthe resolutions ofits Shari'ah Supervisory Board and the prevailing principles and traditions in the field ofits activities.

Credit Study
The credit study is the process of identifying the credit worthiness of the client and his ability to honor his commitments within the specified period. It also aims to assess the suitability ofthe type, size and currency of the requested financing to the activity to be financed, and to what extent the financing is commensurate with the resources and capabilities of the client in general. Moreover, the  credit study indicates -  subject to the nature of financing operations - the suitable guarantees to be requested from the client, whether for the debts and entitlements stemming from the operations or against transgression and negligence from his part. The final result of the study presents a clear recommendation on whether the client is to be offered the facility subject to certain conditions, or his application should be rejected on the basis of specific reasons.

The credit study covers the financial standing, cash flow, activity results, income,  and expenses of the client. It also covers other various aspects such as past experience of the institution with the same client, image ofthe client, and his ability to manage his activity and stand any difficulties he may encounter while practicing such activity.

Facility Agreement
This agreement is signed between the client who applies for the facility and the institution  when the decision to offer the facility is issued.  The agreement  indicates the type and amount  of the facility as well as the guarantees and profit margin, or profit sharing ratio in case ofMusharakah in Islamic transactions. Such agreement is not considered to be binding for the client before entering into the actual contracts.






941

























Shari'ah Standard No. (38)




Online Financial  Dealings












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface...................................................................................................        947
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        948

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               948
2. Launching Commercial Websites for Contractual Dealings..............       948
3. Provision of Online Access Services                                                            948
4. Contract  Signing  Session (Majlis  al-'Aqd) for Concluding Online
Financial Contracts..................................................................................       949
5. Expressing Offer and Acceptance in Online Financial Contracts .....        950
6. Time of Commencement of an Online Contract.................................       951
7. Possession (Qabd) in Online Financial Contracts...............................       951
8. Protection of Online Financial Dealings                                                  951
9. Date oflssuance of the Standard                                                              954
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        955
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............        956
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard.....................................       958
Appendix (c):  Definitions..............................................................................        962



















945








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to indicate the Shari'ah rulings relating to conclusion ofcontracts and financial dealings online, and illustrate what the Institution/ Institutions!should observe in this respect.

































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



947




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard covers the Shari'ah rulings relating to conclusion of financial contracts online, either by launching commercial websites, or by provision of online access services. The standard aims to indicate the various aspects pertaining  to  this  subject  such  as the  Shari'ah  status  of the  contracts concluded in this manner, determination  of the time of contract inception, permissible  procedures   of  possession  after  signing  the  contract,  and Shari'ah rulings relating to protection of online financial dealings.

2. Launching Commercial Websites for Contractual Dealings

2/1  It is permissible in Shari'ah to launch commercial websites, provided that such sites do not involve any impermissible act, such as promotion of impermissible goods and services, or using impermissible means to promote pemissible goods and services.

2/2  It is permissible in Sharf'ah to conclude online contracts, provided that the contracts  thus concluded  between the institution  and its clients observe the general rules of financial transactions  as prescribed by the Sharf'ah, regarding for instance, opening of the accounts, performing remittances and signing commercial contracts.

3. Provision  of Online Access Services

3/1  Sharf'ah permits institutions to provide online access services to users on the basis of subscription  contracts or any other similar arrangement, and against a specific fee.

3/2  The contract for provision of online access service by the institution is a shared-hiring contract "Ijarah Mushtarakah" signed between the institution and the beneficiary. Therefore, it should become subject to the conditions  and rulings of the contract  for hiring of persons in general, and those of the contract  for hiring of a shared employee in



948




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings

particular.  [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (34) on Hiring of Persons and
Sharf'ah Standard No. (9) on Ijarah and Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek]

3/3 The institution which provides such service should take all necessary precautions and measures to prevent impermissible use of the inter• net by the beneficiaries to whom the Institution provides the access service.

4. Contract Signing Session  (Majlis  al-'Aqd)  for Concluding  Online
Financial Contracts

4/1  When the contract is concluded through audio or audiovisual com• munication between the two parties, it should become subject to the same Shari'ah rulings on contracts signed in the presence of the two parties. Consequently it should satisfy the rulings relating to this type of contracts which include, for instance: simultaneous presence of the two parties (Itihad al-Majlis), non-existence of any indication of disinterest from any of the two parties, succession of offer and acceptance (as per normal practice), and all the other rulings.

4/1/1 The contract signing session in this case is the time of com• munication between the two parties if the conversation relates to the contract. If the conversation is over or disconnected, or the two parties shifted to another subject, the contract signing session is considered to have stopped (unless disconnection of the conversation is for a reasonably short while).

4/2 When the contract is concluded through written communication, by e-mail, or through  access to site, it shall become subject to the rulings  applicable to contracts  signed in the  absence of the two parties, because such deal is similar to message contracting.

4/2/1 The contract signing session in the case indicated in item 4/2 above starts from the moment of communicating the offer to the concerned party up to issuance ofacceptance. The contract signing session may also be discontinued when the offering party retreats from his offer before an acceptance decision is made by the other party.



949




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings

4/2/2 When  the offering party  specifies a certain period  for validity of his offer, the time allowed for acceptance  should  cover the whole  period. The  offering party  has  no  right  to withdraw from his offer during that period.

4/3 When  the contract  is concluded through  online bidding the highest bidder  should  not  retreat  from his bid until  the  bidding  process is over. The highest bidder  should also not retreat from his offer after finalization of the bidding process if the seller had made a condition that the  offer should  remain  binding  for a certain  period,  or if the normal practice necessitates validity of the offer for such period.

5. Expressing Offer and Acceptance in Online Financial Contracts

5/1  Expression of offer and acceptance in online contracts  can be in any form  that  indicates  the consent  of the two parties  to conclude  the contract.

5/2 When the offering party  sends through  website or e-mail a message containing all the rights and commitments pertaining to the contract in question without  retaining  the right of withdrawal  if the message is accepted, that message is considered  as an offer.

5/3  When the offering party sends the electronic message through website or e-mail without indicating all the rights and commitments  relating to the contract in question, or when he stipulates a condition that he should have the right of withdrawal  even if the message is accepted, the message is considered to be an announcement  or an invitation for contracting  rather  than  an offer. In this case a process of offer and acceptance has to be done.

5/4 When  the  contract  is concluded  through  website, clicking on  the acceptance  icon  is considered  as acceptance in  the  strict  Shari'ah sense if the system in the website does not require  confirmation of acceptance. If the system in the website requires confirmation of ac• ceptance in any way, acceptance does not take place without making such confirmation.



950




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings

5/4/1 The Institution which provides  its services on website should include  in the system  a step for acceptance confirmation as a precautionary measure  against dealers' mistakes.
6. Time of Commencement of an Online Contract

Irrespective of the method  of contracting, an online contract is considered to be valid  since the  time  when  the  other  party  accepts the  offer and whether  the offering party has come to know that or not.
7. Possession (Qabd) in Online Financial Contracts

7/1  Regarding  online  contracts,  possession  in the  strict  Shari'ah sense takes place through  all accepted methods  of actual and constructive possession.  [see Sharf'ah Standard No.  (18) on Possession  (Qabd), items 3 and 5]
7/2  If the sold commodity  is computer software or the like, possession in the strict Shari'ah sense takes place when the purchaser, after signing the contract,  downloads  the software or the data or any good of this type from the website to his personal  computer.

7/3 When  the  sold commodity is a currency, gold, silver or any other commodity in which instant exchange (Taqabud)  is required, instant exchange  of the  two objects  of the  contract  should  be ascertained during  the contract's  signing session.
8. Protection of Online Financial Dealings

8/1 Protection ofcommercial sites and dealers dataagainstbeing trespassed

8/1/1 Commercial websites are considered as private  properties of their owners, and therefore  their trespassing could necessitate compensation.

8/1/2 The  institution should  use all possible  measures of website protection, so as to safeguard its own rights as well as the rights of its clients.

8/1/3  Trespassing of dealers' online data is impermissible. It is strictly prohibited to sell such data or transmit  it to others without the permission of its owners.



951




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings

8/1/4 Verification of trespassing of commercial sites and data stealing should  be done by referring  to the prevailing  traditions and regulating rules which do not encounter the rules and principles ofShari'ah.

8/1/5 The compensation due in case of trespassing  should comprise direct  financial loss as well as actual loss of earnings.  Expert advice for assessment of compensation  can also be sought when need arises.

8/1/6  Compensation shall become due only when it is claimed, whereas claiming compensation does not have a specific time limit after the incident of trespassing is known. In this regard relevant rules and regulations should be observed provided that they do not contradict with the rules and principles of Shari'ah.

8/1/7  In case of stealing money or confidential data from a protected website the responsibility should rest with the person who com• mitted the theft directly.  If it is not possible, for a permissible reason, to charge the person who committed the act of theft di• rectly, the responsibility should rest with the one who facilitated the act. The owner ofthe site is by no means chargeable for such act, if he has taken all possible measures to protect his site, and unless he has pledged to shoulder such responsibility under all circumstances.

8/2 Verification of dealers' identities

8/2/1 In order to safeguard  its own interests,  the Institution should take all possible precautions and measures to verify the identities of its website  dealers,  and  make  sure  that  they  are  legally competent for concluding valid contracts.

8/2/2 It is acceptable  in  Shari'ah  to  adopt  the  electronic  signature as a means of verifying the identities  of dealers, provided  that such means  is adoptable  by virtue  of the prevailing rules and regulations.



952




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings

8/2/3 When  forgery  or an  error is committed with  regard  to the personality or characteristics of one  of the  two parties,  the other party has the right to terminate the contract.
8/2/4 For verification  of forgery or error recourse should be to the general rules of evidence.
8/3 Protection of dealers from adhesion contracts ('Uqud al-Izan)

8/3/1  It can be noticed that in a big part  of the online contracts the offer is addressed to the public in general and the contract has uniform details. In such contracts also the offering party alone has  the  right  of stipulating  the  terms  and  conditions  of the contract, while the other party does not have the right to change such terms and conditions. A contract of this type is considered as an "adhesion contract''  when  it relates to a commodity  or usufruct  that  nobody  can  do without, and the  offering party assumes actual and legal monopoly or face only meager degree of competition in its supplying.

8/3/2 According  to  Sharf'ah,  online  adhesion  contracts  should  be subject to state control so as to protect dealers by endorsement of what is equitable  and elimination  of what is inequitable  in these contracts, before launching them to dealers.
8/3/3  Ifthe price in the online adhesion contract is fair, and the terms and conditions  of the contract  do not entail any injustice  for the adhering party, the contract is considered to be permissible and binding to its two parties.
8/3/4 Ifthe price in the online adhesion contract is unfair  (comprises excessive injustice), or the contract includes an unjust condition for the adhering party, the latter has the right to resort to law for nullification of the contract or amending its conditions for the sake of relieving him from the consequent injustice.

8/4  If the  online  contract  is concluded  on the  basis of describing  the sold object,  or depending  on the fact that the buyer has previously seen the object, or on presentation  of a model resembling the object,



953




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings

whereas at the time ofdelivery the sold object is found to be different, the buyer  should have the choice between  concluding  the contract, terminating it, or negotiating  with  the seller appropriate  means  of settlement.

9. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued 17 Rabi' I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 15 March
2009A.D.













































954




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted the Standard on Online Financial Dealings in
its meeting No. (23) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain, on Thursday- Saturday
15-17 Rabf' I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 12-15 March 2009 A.D.













































955




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No.  (16) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah, on 7-12
Jumada I, 1427  A.H.,  corresponding  to 3-8 June 2006 A.D., the Shari'ah
Board decided to issue a Sharfah standard on Online Financial Dealings.

On  12 Rajah  1427 A.H., corresponding  to 6 August 2005  A.D.,  the Secretariat General decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a study on Online Financial Dealings.

A joint committee composed from Shari'ah Committees (1) and (2) held a meeting in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on 18 Safar 1428 A.H., coresponding to 8 March 2006 A.D. The joint committee discussed the study, and asked the consultant to introduce necessary changes in the light ofthe discussions and observations ofthe meeting.

In a further  meeting of the joint  committee, held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 24 Rabi' II,  1428  A.H., coresponding  to 11  May 2007 A.D., the draft of the standard was discussed and the consulted was requested to introduce  necessary amendments  in the light of the discussions and observations ofthe meeting.

In  its meeting No.  (19)  held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah,  on 26-30
Sha'ban 1428 A.H., corresponding to 8-12 September 2007 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed the amendments made by the joint committee meeting and introduced the changes which it deemed necessary.

In its meeting No. (20) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain, on 4--8 Safar
1429 A.H., corresponding to  11-15 February  2008  A.D., the  Shari'ah Board discussed  once again the draft standard and introduced further changes.



956




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings

The Secretarial General ofAAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 24 Safar 1430 A.H., coresponding to 19 February 2009 A.D. More than 30 participants attended the session as representatives of central banks, institutions, and accounting firms. The session was also attended by Shari'ah scholars, university teachers and other interested parties. Several observations  were made  in the  session, and  duly responded  to by the members of the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2).

In its meeting No.  (23) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on Thursday
- Saturday 15-17 Rabi' I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 12-15 March 2009
A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the amendments suggested by the public hearing, introduced the changes that it deemed necessary and adopted the standard.






































957





Shari'ah Stan dard No. (38): Onlin e Finan cial Dealin gs





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


The basis for permissibility of launching  commercial websites if such sites are free from impermissible practices is the fact that in principle, transactions in any form are allowed,  unless they lead to commitment of an impermissible act. Moreover, launching of such sites serves the interests of a large number of people in this era, and thus, conforms to the underlying mission of Sharf'ah.
• Permissibility of concluding online financial contracts is due to the fact that such contracts do not involve any impermissible aspect. They carry no difference from traditional contracts except in that the means used for their conclusion is different. If, in principle, contracts as such are allowed as long as they observe the rules of transactions  in Shari'ah, it is only natural that the means whereby these contracts are concluded become allowed as long as they conform to permissible rules of contracting.
• Concluding online contracts through audio or audiovisual communica• tion between the two parties is classified under the category ofcontracts concluded in the presence of the two parties, because in such online contracts both parties are in fact present at the same time, although not in the same place. Therefore, simultaneous presence ofthe two parties in terms of time, which constitutes the prerequisite meant by coincidence ofpresence, is fulfilled at the time ofexchanging offer and acceptance. In  this  connection  the  International   Islamic  Fiqh  Academy  issued a resolution about the Shari'ah ruling on concluding contracts through the modern  means  of communication.  The text of the resolution  is as follows:  "If any two parties  enter into a contract  at the same time while they are in different places --  this includes contracting  through

(2) See: "Fath Al-Qadir" [3: 190-192]; "HashiyatAl-Dusuqi 'Ala AI-Sharh AL-Kabir" [3: 5]; "Maughni
AL-Muhtaj" [2: 5]; "AL-Maughni" [3: 481]; and see "AL-Madkhal AL-Fiqhi AI-'Am" [1: 348].



958




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Onlin e Financial Dealin gs

telephone and wireless devices - contracting between these two parties is considered as contracting between two present parties  Needless to say, there is no difference between contracting through a telephone call, and contracting through online voice communication.
When  the  contract  is concluded through  written  communication,  by e-mail, or through access to site, it shall be classified as a contract signed in the absence ofthe two parties. This ruling is based on the fact that exchange of offer and acceptance in this  case takes place without  simultaneous presence ofthe two parties. In this regard the Al Baraka Seminar on Islamic Economics issued a resolution stating that "According to Shari'ah, when an online contract is signed between two parties who are not in the same place, it is considered as a contract between two absent parties ifneither of the two parties can hear the voice ofthe other. Consequently such contract should become subject to the Sharf'ah rulings on message contracting!
• The ruling that the offering party does not have the right to retreat from his offer within the period specified by the seller for validity of the offer is based on the viewpoint of some Maliki scholars who believe that if an offer is announced to be valid for a specific period it should remain valid throughout that period. This viewpoint has been emphasized by Al• Hattab quoting Abu Bakar Al-Arabi."In this regard also The International Islamic Fiqh Academy issued a resolution emphasizing the following: "When the offering party issues a term-offer through these devices, he is committed to keep his offer during the specified period. He does not have the right to retreat from it?9
When the offering party sends the electronic message through  website or e-mail without  indicating  all the rights and commitments  relating to the contract  in question, or when he stipulates a condition  that he should have the right ofwithdrawal  even if the message is accepted, the

(3) Resolution No. 52 (3/6).
(4) The 19 AI Baraka Seminar on Islamic Economics, held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, on 6-7 Ramadan 1420 A.H., corresponding to 2-3 December 2000 A.D.
(5) See:  "Mawahib Al-Jalil" by AI-Hattab [4:  241]. This viewpoint has been adopted by a number of civil laws, and is known as "Term Offer': See article (98) ofthe Jordanian Civil Law and article (93) of the Syrian Civil Law.
(6) Resolution No. 52 (3/6).



959





Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online  Financial  Dealings

message is not considered as an offer, because from a Sharf'ah point of view an offer should be categorically obvious and cannot bear any other meaning.
■  The ruling  that  irrespective  of the method  of contracting  an online contract is considered to be valid since the time when the other party accepts the offer and whether the offering party has come to know that or not,  is based  on the fact that  Sharf'ah  scholars define contract  as "the concordance oftwo wills. Therefore as soon as the accepting party declares his  consent  concordance  between  the two wills takes place and the contract  becomes valid.    A resolution  issued in this regard by the International Islamic Fiqh Academy states: "When a contract is to be signed, through  a written message or a messenger, between two absent parties who are not in the same place and neither  of them can see or hear the other - a case which includes contracting through telex, fax and PC screens - the validity of such contract starts as soon as the concerned party receives and accepts the offer.(
■  The ruling that possession in the strict Shari'ah sense takes place when the purchaser, after signing the contract, downloads the computer software or the data or any other good of this type from the website to his pc, is based on the fact that possession takes place actually and constructively when the sold object is released and disposition is facilitated for the buyer. Possession of objects differs according to the type of the object in question and how its possession is normally perceived. In this respect a resolution has been issued by the International Islamic Fiqh Academy regarding possession and its forms, especially the recent ones.(
■  Prohibition of trespassing commercial websites and data theft is derived from prohibition ofall forms ofencroaching upon rights ofothers because Allah, the Almighty, says: {"...but transgress not the limits. Truly, Allah likes not the transgressors.}.A    Moreover, websites have financial worth, and are considered as private rights of their owners. Trespassing of such

(7) See:  "Fath Al-Qadir" [3:  190-92];  "Hashiyat Al-Dusuqi 'Ala AI-Sharh AL-Kabir" [3: 5];
"Mughni Al-Muhtaj" [2: 5]; and  "Al-Maughni" [3: 481].
(8) See:  "Bada 'i' AI-Sana'i" [6: 2994]  and  "Hashiyat Ibn 'Abidin" [7: 26].
(9) Resolution  No. 52 (3/6). (10) Resolution No. 53 (4/6).
(11)  [Al-Baqarah  (The Cow):190].



960




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings

sites may result in financial harm for their owners. In this regard the International  Islamic Fiqh Academy issued a resolution emphasizing prohibition of transgression against trade name, trade address, trademark and all other similar rights.(3
• Acceptability of adopting the electronic signature as a means ofverifying the identities of dealers if such means is recognizable by the prevailing rules and regulations is based on the need to avoid the harm that could arise from online forgery in the dealers' identities. In addition to that, adopting electronic signature does not constitute an impermissible practice. In fact Shari'ah encourages the use of technological means to preserve peoples' wealth, because preservation of wealth constitutes one of the main five aims (Maqasid)  of Shari'ah.
■  The ruling that when forgery or an error is committed with regard to the personality or characteristics of one of the two parties, the other party has the right to terminate  the contract is based on the fact that such an incident can influence the consent of the deceived party. According to Sharf'ah the consent ofthe two parties is the fundamental prerequisite of contracting. This fact has been emphasized by the majority of Shari'ah scholars.
■  The ruling that the state has to assume control upon  online adhesion contracts  -  which  are characterized with  launching  of public  offers, uniform details, imposed terms and conditions, provision ofindispensible commodities or usufructs  and monopoly of supply -  is based on the general texts of Shari'ah which instruct people to avoid harm and achieve justice.
• If a contract is concluded on the basis of describing the object sold, or depending on the fact that the buyer has previously seen the object, or on presentation of a model resembling the object; whereas at the time of delivery the sold object is found to be different, the buyer should have the option of terminating the contract for false description. This ruling is based on the need for preservation of the rights of the two parties of the contract, as has been emphasized by the majority of Fiqh scholars.

(12) Resolution No. (5), 5 Session 1408 A.H. - 1988 A.D.
(13) See:  "AL-Mawsuah Al-Fiqhiyyah", the term Rida, Vol. (22).



961




Shari'ah Standard No. (38): Online Financial Dealings





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Internet

A cross-border  devise of communication between computer networks.

Website

Information stored in the form of pages, while each page contains a set of certain type of information  formed up by a page designer by using special symbols. For browsing ofthe pages, software ofinternet browser is requested, so as to resolve the symbols and issue orders for page display.

Internet Service Provider

The service provider  is the party  (institution)  which provides lines of internet access to beneficiaries on the basis of subscription contracts or any other arrangement, against a specific fee.

Electronic Signature

The electronic signature is data in the form of letters, figures, symbols, signs or any other  form, embodied  in or attached to or liked with an in• formation  message through  electronic, digital, phonic or any other format The electronic signature has a style which allows specification of the distinct identity of the signatory, so that the signature can be verified and the content of the message is approved.

Electronic Message

The data and information published or exchanged  through electronic devices such as internet,  telex, fax and other similar means.









962






















Shari'ah Standard No.  (39)


Mortgage and Its
Contemporary Applications












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface...................................................................................................        967
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................        968

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               968
2. Definition of Mortgage                                                                             968
3. Sharf'ah Rulings on Mortgage                                                                  968
4. Mortgage of Financial Papers and Sukuk..............................................       973
5. Mortgage of Current Accounts and Cash Securities............................       974
6. Mortgage of Investment Units and Investment Accounts...................       974
7. Mortgage ofWhat Will Be Owned.........................................................        975
8. Insurance of the Mortgaged Asset..........................................................       975
9. Zakah on the Mortgaged Asset...............................................................        975
10. Date oflssuance of the Standard.............................................................       975
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................        976
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History of the Preparation of the Standard..............        977
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard.....................................       979




















965








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This standard aims to indicate Shari'ah rulings on mortgage and its contemporary applications in Islamic financial institutions (Institution/ Institutions).

































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



967





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This standard  covers mortgages requested by the Institution  with the aim of documenting  the debts and commitments  owed to it by other individuals and Institutions.  It is also covers the mortgages presented by the Institution to other parties in order to document the debts and commitments  it owes to them. Furthermore, the standard  covers the mortgages which the Institution, in its capacity as a notary or agent, keeps for the benefit of other parties.

2. Definition of Mortgage

To mortgage means to make a financial asset or so tied to a debt so that the asset or its value is used for repayment ofthe debt in case of default

3. Shari'ah Rulings on Mortgage

3/1  Mortgage is permissible in Qur'an,  Sunnah  (Prophetic tradition)
and Ijma' (consensus of Fuqaha).

3/1/1 The mortgage contract is binding for the mortgagor  once it is concluded, and the mortgagor  does not have the right to revoke it from bis own side, whereas the mortgagee has the right to do so.

3/1/2 Possession ofthe mortgaged asset takes place on the basis ofthe same requirements for possession of a sold property. It could be actual possession by putting a hand on the property, which is known as seizure mortgage; or possession could be legal through registration and documentation, which is known as security or formal mortgage. Both types of mortgages are subject to the same rulings.

3/1/3  The mortgagee has the right to appoint an agent to possess the mortgage on his behalf. The agent, thus appointed, should have



968





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications

the same rights of disposition which the principal has.  The mortgage can also be put in the hands of the mortgagee or in the hands of a third party known as the notary, to be agreed upon between the two parties.  When the mortgage is kept by a notary neither of the two parties has the right to transfer it to any other location.

3/1/4 The mortgagee has the right to stipulate a condition that the mortgagor  should  appoint  him  or his representative  as an agent who can sell the mortgaged asset and repay the debt out of its value in case of default, without resorting to judiciary. The mortgagor  does not have the right to retreat from such agency once agreed upon.

3/1/5 The death of the mortgagor or the mortgagee has no effect on the validity ofthe mortgage contract. The respective inheritors shall substitute the dead party.

3/1/6 The mortgage contract is no longer valid when the mortgaged asset perishes unless a compensation for it is obtained (through solidarity insurance, for instance). The mortgage contract can also cease to be valid for other reasons such as termination  of the contract by the mortgagee, settlement of or relief from the debt, or relinquishment  of the mortgage right. Furthermore, the validity of the mortgage contract can also expire as a result of transfer of the ownership of the mortgaged asset (through sale, gift or will) on permission of the mortgagee; unless the new owner accepts to keep the mortgage contract. [see item
3/2/6]

3/1/7 The mortgagee has the right to keep the whole mortgaged asset for any part of the debt, unless he accepts partial releasing of the mortgage.  On repayment of the debt the mortgagee has no right to keep the mortgaged asset as a collateral for a new debt for which the asset is not mortgaged, except when the two parties agree to keep the mortgaged asset as a collateral for any debt between them within a specific period.



969





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications

3/2  Rulings relating to the mortgaged asset

3/2/1  The mortgaged asset should be a Shari'ah-permissible proper• ty.  It should also be well specified  (through pointing,  naming or description)  and can possibly be delivered.

3/2/2 In principle, the mortgaged object should be a tangible asset, yet it can be a debt, a cash amount, a fungible asset or a consumable commodity. Perishable objects can also be mortgaged  as they can be sold and replaced by their value. Moreover, a mortgaged object can be a share ofcommon property which can be identified and sold separately.

3/2/3 The same asset can be mortgaged to more than one mortgagee.
If all mortgages  are of the  same rank  the  consent  of all the parties has to be sought, and the mortgage right in the asset is to be shared among them in proportion  to their respective debts. If the mortgages  are ranked  in such  a way that  a succeeding mortgagee should get his debt repaid only when his precedent mortgagee does, the consent of the succeeding mortgagee alone has to be sought

3/2/4 The mortgaged  asset is a trust in the hands  of the mortgagee, the notary  or the agent and is still owned by the mortgagor  as long as it is mortgaged. Therefore when the mortgaged  asset perishes in  the  hands  of the  mortgagee, the  notary   or the agent, for a reason other than  transgression  or negligence, no responsibility shall rest with him, and the debt shall still remain valid. Ifthe perish of the mortgaged asset is due to transgression or negligence of the mortgagee, the agent or the notary he shall be held responsible for compensation  at the value of the asset on the date of its perish, whereas the debt shall remain  valid. In this case the two parties have the right to perform clearance arrangements  between  the  debt amount  and the value of the perished mortgage asset.
3/2/5 The mortgagor  can mortgage  an asset that is owed to him by the  mortgagee,  whether  the  asset  is kept  by the  mortgagee



970





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications

as a trust  (such as deposited or lent assets and investment accounts); or as a guaranteed asset (such as current accounts and assets retained after nullification ofcontracts). In the latter case the status ofthe mortgagee will consequently change from keeping the asset on guarantee basis to keeping it on the basis of trust

3/2/6 The mortgagor  can mortgage  a borrowed  asset (borrowed mortgage), or a rented asset (rented mortgage), on permission ofthe owner in both cases. If a borrowed or rented mortgage is used for repayment of the defaulted debt, the owner of the asset should have the right of recourse on the mortgagor  for compensation;  in kind if the mortgaged  asset is a fungible asset,  or in value if otherwise.  When  a borrowed  or rented mortgage asset perishes in the hands  of the mortgagor, the mortgagor  has to compensate  the  owner  of the borrowed asset, whereas for the rented asset compensation  is deserved only ifthe perish ofthe mortgaged asset is due to transgression or negligence of the mortgagor.

3/2/7 In a sale contract the seller has the right to stipulate a condition that the buyer, after actual or constructive possession of the good, should mortgage it to him against the deferred price.

3/2/8 Appreciation in the value of the mortgaged asset as well as its income is considered to be mortgaged along with the principal, unless the two parties agree otherwise.

3/2/9 The mortgagor can benefit from the mortgaged asset on permis• sion ofthe mortgagee, whereas the mortgagee has no right at all to enjoy free of charge benefit from the mortgaged asset with or without the permission of the mortgagor. However, on permis• sion of the mortgagor the mortgagee can utilize the mortgaged asset against the normal pay for similar assets.  [see items 3/3/ and 4/3]

3/2/10 The mortgagor  should  bear  all actual expenses relating to reparation ofthe mortgaged asset and its preservation against



971





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications

decay.  When   the  mortgagee   pays  such  expenses  with   or without  the permission of the mortgagor he has the right  of recourse on the mortgagor for compensation or he may obtain compensation in terms  of an equivalent  period  of benefiting from the mortgaged assets. The mortgagee  should bear all the expenses  relating  to safekeeping,  documentation and  selling of the mortgaged asset, except when the two parties agree that the mortgagor should bear such expenses.

3/2/11  With due consideration to item (5), it is permissible to mortgage debt, whether  such debt is owed by the mortgagee  or anyone else.

3/2/12 Possession  of a mortgaged  debt takes place by possession  of the debt's document or by attestation  of the  debt at the time of its mortgaging.  When  a debt is mortgaged,  the mortgagee becomes more entitled to it than  anyone else.
3/3  Rulings relating to the debt for which the mortgage is signed

3/3/1 The debt for which  the mortgage  is signed  should  be a per• missible debt such as sale income,  guarantee  against damage, Salam commodity, lstisna'a commodity or an owed usufruct. Concluding a valid mortgage  contract  need not necessarily be preceded by establishing the debt. The mortgage contract can be signed before or at the same time of signing the debt con• tract. The debt for which the mortgage  is signed should not be a impermissible debt (such as a usurious  loan); or a non-debt deal (such as a specific price, the usufruct of a specific asset, and  a spot  sale commodity that  is still in  the  hands  of the seller).

3/3/2  It is impermissible to stipulate mortgage as a condition in trust• based contracts such as agency, deposit, Musharakah, Mudara• bah  and leasing contracts.  If mortgage in such contracts  is to be confined  to indemnity  in case of transgression,  negligence or breach of the  contract,  then  it is permissible.  [see  Shari'ah Standard No. (5) on Guarantees, item 2/2/1]



972





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage and Its Contemporary Applications

3/4 Execution of the mortgage

3/4/1 With due consideration to item 3/1/4, the mortgagee has the right to claim the sale ofthe mortgaged asset in case of default After repayment of the mortgagee's debt the remaining value of the  mortgaged  asset should be given to the  mortgagor by virtue of the mortgage contract  If the sale value of the mortgaged asset happened to be less than the due debt, the difference shall be subject to Shari'ah rulings on normal debt, and the mortgagee should have the right of recourse on the mortgagor for settlement of such difference.

3/4/2 The mortgagee does not have the right to stipulate a condition that he should own the asset in case of default Nevertheless, there  is no prohibition  for the mortgagee to purchase the mortgaged asset from the mortgagor at market value, and take the portion of the value to which he is entitled.

3/5/3 When the mortgagor is bankrupt, the mortgagee should have the priority  over other  debtors, for getting his  debt repaid from the sale value of the mortgaged asset  If the sale value of the mortgaged asset is less than the mortgagee's debt, he becomes in the same standing with other debtors with regard to the excess indebtedness.

4. Mortgage of Financial Papers and Sukuk.

4/1  It is permissible to mortgage the financial papers and Sukuk which can be issued and transacted according to Shari'ah, such as Islamic Sukuk  and shares of Islamic financial Institutions.  The shares  of the companies whose original activities are permissible can also be added to this category. [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (21) on Financial Paper: Shares and Bonds, item 3/4]

4/2 It is permissible to mortgage usufruct-based Sukuk which represent common shares in the usufructs  of specific assets, or assets in the form of a specific indebtedness.  This should be taken with due consideration to Sharf'ah Standard No. (17) on Investment Sukuk, item 5/1/5/2.



973





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications

4/3  It is impermissible  to mortgage  the financial papers  and Su.kuk that should  not  be issued  or transacted   according  to Shari'ah, such  as interest-based bonds, preference  shares and  enjoyment  shares  [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (21) on Financial  Paper: Shares and Bonds, items  2/6 and  2/7].  Such financial  papers  include  also traditional investment  certificates, certificates oftraditional investment deposits and  shares  of the  companies  that  pursue  impermissible  activities like manufacturing of alcohols, swine trade and dealing in Riha [see Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (21) on Financial  Paper:  Shares and Bonds, item 2/1  and  Shari'ah Standard No. (14) on Documentary Credit, items 3/4/1 and 3/4/2]. Among these financial papers also are shares of traditional  financial  Institutions,  shares  of traditional financial companies,  shares of traditional insurance  companies and shares of companies  which originally pursue  permissible  activities, yet Riha• based and other prohibited  dealings constitute  a predominant part of their activities.

5. Mortgage of Current Accounts and Cash Securities

When a current account is mortgaged for the benefit of the same institu• tion with which it is opened, the institution  should not use the account unless an agreement  is reached between  the two parties to transfer  the account to an investment account, and thus, make it subject to the rulings on Mudarabah  instead of the rulings on loan. This is so because the in• stitution, as a mortgagee, has to avoid making free of charge benefit from the mortgaged account On transference of the account to an investment account, the  account holder  becomes entitled  to his profit share as the owner of the capital (Rab al-Mal), while the institution  becomes entitled to its profit share as the worker (Mudarib).

6. Mortgage of Investment  Units and Investment  Accounts

6/1  The Institution  can accept mortgage in the form of investment units in Islamic investment funds. In this case the Institution as a mortgagee can suspend the right ofthe client to get back or draw from the account, absolutely or in proportion  to the amount  of the debt, whichever is more suitable.



974





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications

6/2 The income  and growth earned  by the units or the account  are considered to be mortgaged  along with the principal. This should hold true whether  the contractual  relationship between the client and the Institution or the fund is Mudarabah or investment agency, unless the two parties agree on other arrangement.

7. Mortgage of What Will Be Owned

It is permissible to mortgage an income which is still to be owned if the principal (income earning asset) is specified. The contract in this case is valid whether such income is to be mortgaged along with the principal or independently.

8. Insurance of the Mortgaged Asset

The mortgagee has the right at the time ofsigning the contract to request from the mortgagor  to arrange  Islamic insurance  for the mortgaged asset whenever it is possible. When the mortgagor accepts to do so the compensation to be received on the damage of the mortgaged asset shall replace it. If the compensation is received in the form of a cash amount such amount shall be mortgaged along with its returns by depositing it in a frozen investment account owned by the mortgagor. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (5) on Guarantees, item 4/8]

9. Zakah on the Mortgaged Asset

9/1  The owner of the mortgaged asset should pay Zak.ah if it is payable on the asset and its income or on its income only. The fact that the owner cannot dispose of the mortgaged asset does not relief him from payment of Zakah.

9/2 Zakah is payable on all cash mortgages such as current accounts, cash securities, units of investment  funds, frozen investment accounts, Sukuk, Salam debts, and Istisna'a debts, subject to stipulations  of Shari'ah Standard No. (35) on Zak.ah, items 5/1, 5/2 and 5/3.

10. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 17 Rabi' I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 15
March 2009 A.D.



975





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications





Adoption of the Standard


The Sharf'ah Board adopted the standard on Mortgage and its Contemporary Applications in its meeting No. (23) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on Thursday - Saturday 15-17 Rabi' I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 12-15 March 2009 A.D.











































976





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In  its  meeting   No.   (16)  held  in  Al-Madinah  Al-Munawwarah  on
7-12  Jumada I,  1427  A.H.,  corresponding to  3-8  June 2006  A.D., the Sharf'ah Board  decided  to issue a Shari'ah standard on Mortgage and Its Contemporary Applications.

On  12 Rajah  1427 A.H.,  corresponding  to  6 August 2005  A.D., the Secretariat General decided to commission  a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a study on Mortgage and Its Contemporary Applications.

A joint  committee  composed  from Shari'ah Standards  Committees  (1)
and  (2) held  a meeting  in the Kingdom  of Bahrain,  on 24 Rabi' II,  1428
A.H., corresponding to  11 May 2007 A.D., the joint  committee  discussed the study, and asked the consultant  to introduce necessary  changes in the light of the discussions and observations  of the meeting.
In a further  meeting  of the joint  committee, held in the State of Kuwait on 21 Jumada I, 1428 A.H., corresponding to 7 June 2007 A.D., the draft of the standard was discussed and necessary amendments were introduced in the light of the discussions and observations  of the meeting.
In its  meeting No.  (22)  held  in  the  Kingdom  of Bahrain,  on  28-30
Dhul-Qa'dah 1430 A.H., corresponding to 26-28 November  2008 A.D., the Shari'ah  Board discussed  the amendments made  by the joint meetings  of the Shari'ah Standards Committees  (1) and (2) and introduced the changes which it deemed necessary.

The Secretarial General of AAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 24 Safar 1430 A.H., corresponding  to 19 February 2009 A.D. More than  30 participants  attended the session as representatives of central



977





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications

banks, institutions, and accounting firms. The session was also attended by Shari'ah scholars, university teachers and other interested parties. Several observations were made  in the  session,  and  duly responded  to by the members ofthe Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2).

In its meeting No.  (23) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain,  on Thursday
- Saturday 15-17 Rabi' I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 12-15 March 2009
A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the amendments introduced by the public hearing, introduced the changes that it deemed necessary and adopted the standard.










































978





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage and Its Contemporary Applications





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Shari'ah Rulings on Mortgage (item 3)
•  Mortgage  is permissible  when  the  debt  transaction   takes  place  while the two parties  are on travel because Allah, the Almighty,  says:  {"I And if you  are on a journey  and cannot find a scribe,  then let  there be apledge taken (mortgaging)...}• Mortgage is also permissible when the contracting  parties  are not on travel,  because Anas is reported  to have said:  "The Prophet (peace be upon Him) mortgaged his armor plate to a Jew in Al-Madinah  and took some barleyfrom him to hisfamily".  In this regard Ibn Al-Mundhir said: "I do not know anyone, except Mujahid, who held a different interpretation for the Verse: {"..ifyou are on ajourney ...etc}. Traveling  (adds Ibn Al-Mundhir)  is referred to in the Verse as the pre• dominant  case where mortgage  is needed, since traveling parties would most probably be in lack of a scribe. Hence the verse, although it mentions traveling, it does not stipulate it as a condition  for concluding mortgage contracts. Mortgage is also not obligatory, a fact which - to my knowledge
- has encountered  no dispute. The emphasis on mortgage in the Verse in•
dicates guidance rather than obligation, because Allah, the Almighty, says:
{"and ifone ofyou deposits a thing on trust with another}.
•  According  to  the  Hanbali, Hanafiand  Shafi'i  scholars  mortgage  is valid and binding  when it is stipulated as a condition  in a sale contract. The Hanbali"° scholars believe that it is one of the conditions  that serve

(2) [Al-Baqarah (The Cow): 283].
(3) Muhammad Ibn Abdul-Wahhab, "Mukhtasar AI-Insaf Wa AI-Sharh Al-Kabir"  [1: 506], Matabi' Al-Riyadh, Riyadh, First Edition, Abdul-Aziz lbn Zayd Al-Rumi et al (eds.).
Electronic Copy, Al-Jami' Al-Kabir Program.
(4) Ala' AI-Din (AI-Mardawi), "Al-Insaf, op. cit, [11: 206-207].
(5) Ala' AI-Din AI-Samarqandi, "Tuhfat Al-Fuqaha"", op. cit, [2: 70].
(6) Ministry ofAwqaf - Kuwait, "AI-Mawsuah Al-Fiqhiyyah", the letter Ba, Bay' Wa Shurut, item 28.



979





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications

the  interest  of the  contract,  whereas the  Hanafi  scholars consider  it as one of the conditions that suit and conform to the contract, since it entails contract  documentation•    In  elaborating their  standpoint  the Hanafi scholars indicate:  "In Shari'ah,  mortgage as well as price surety• ship  serve the purpose of debt documentation.  Stipulating mortgage as a condition in the contract is just like stipulating a condition that relates to quality of the price, hence it is an explicit condition for what the contract implicitly aims at!° Mortgage is one of the conditions needed when the deal is to be concluded with someone who insists on them. If a condition ofthis type is not fulfilled the concerned party will have the right ofoption. One of the cases that justify having the right of option, according to the Hanafi scholars, is "Refraining from honoring a valid condition like the mortgage condition or suretyship for an outstanding debt.(9
■    Keeping the mortgaged asset in the hands of a notary is permissible. Ac•
cording to the Shafi'i scholars it is permissible "because the right belongs to the two parties, so they can agree on that".(0
■    According to the Hanbali School when the seller stipulates a condition that he shall keep the sold object until he receives the price, his condition is considered to be valid and observable. To the Hanbali scholars, such type of condition is neither part of the contract's necessities nor does it serve the contract's interest, yet it does not run counter to the contract's objectives. Nonetheless, such condition  (as  perceived by the Hanbali scholars) entails some benefit for the seller or the buyer.
■    The seller does not have the right to stipulate a condition that he shall re• tain the ownership ofthe sold commodity until he receives the price which is deferred for a certain period. The seller does not have such right be•

(7) Mustafa Ahmad Al-Zarqa, "AI-Madkhal Al-Fiqhi AI-'Am", published  1968,  [1: 477-478]. (8) Ala'  AI-Din AI-Samar qandi,  "Tuhfat AL-Fuqaha"", op.        [2: 70].
(9) Muhammad   Al-Hajjar,   "Fath  Al-'Allam Bi-Sharh Murshid Al-Anam  Fi  AL-Fiqh  'Ala
Madhab Al-Sadah Al-Shafi'yyah" [5:  19], Dar Ibn Hazm , Beirut, First Edition, 1418 A.H. (10) Ibrahim  Ibn Ali Ibn Yusuf AI-Shirazi Abu Ishaq,  "AL-Muhadhdhab Fi Fiqh Al-Imam Al-Shaff'ir [1: 310], Dar Al-Fikr, Beirut. Electronic copy: Al-Jami' AI-Kabir Program.
(11) Minis try ofAwqaf - Kuwait, "AI-Mawswah Al-Fiqhiyyah", the letter Ba, Bay' Wa Shurut,
item 28.
(12) Mini stry of Awqaf - Kuwait,  "AI-Mawswah Al-Fiqhiyyah", the letter Ba, Bay, "Ahkam
Mushtarakah Bayn Al-Mabi' Wa Al-Thaman", item 60/D.



980





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage and Its Contemporary Ap plications

cause he has willingly relinquished his right in spot payment of the price; therefore, he has no right to cancel the right of the other party  (to get the sold commodity). This viewpoint is adopted by the Hanbali School.0
Rulings Relating to the Mortgaged Asset (item 3/2)
•  The mortgaged asset should be a Sharf'ah-permissible property because the underlying  objective is to sell this asset for settlement of the debt in case of default. Therefore if the mortgaged asset is an impermissible pro• perty of the mortgagor, it cannot be sold. In this regard the Hanafi scho• lars indicate that "Mortgage is for settlement ofdebt, and a Muslim cannot repay debts or get debts repaid to him in terms of Sharf'ah-banned objects
such as alcohol and swine. In "Al-Insaf" the Hanbali viewpoint is indi•
cated as follows: "It is permissible to mortgage any asset that can be sold.00
•  The mortgaged asset can be a debt,a cash amount,    a common pro•

(13) Ala' Al-Din AI-Samarqandi, "Tuhfat AL-Fuqaha', op. cit, [2: 56]. (14) Ala' Al-Din (AI-Mardawi), "AL-Insaf, op. cit, [11: 491]
(15) Ala' Al-Din AI-Samarqandi, "Tuhfat AL-Fuqaha, op. cit, [3: 53-54]
(16) Muhammad Ibn Abdul-Wahhab, "Mukhtasar AL-Insaf Wa AI-Sharh AL-Kabir" [1: 511], Al-Riyadh Press, Riyadh, First Edition, Abdul-Aziz Ibn Zayd AI-Rumi et al (eds.).
{17)  In "Al-Insaf" Mortgage is defined as "documentation of a debt by an asset so that the debt can be repaid from the sale value ofthe asset when repayment from other sources is not possible". AI-Zarkashi said: "Mortgage is documentation of a debt by an asset or a debt'. This viewpoint of Al-Zarkashi is reported by Ala' AI-Din (Al-Mardawi) in "AL-Insaf" printed with "AL-Muqni"; "Al-Sharh Al-Kabir" and "Al-Insaf [12: 359], Hujar Press, First Edition, 1995.
(18) According to the Shafi'i scholars "It is permissible to lend cash so as to be mortgaged.
When the debt is due, if the debtor made repayment the case is obvious, otherwise
the cash can be used for purchasing the asset required for settlement, or the same cash amount can be paid for settlement of the debt if it is a cash debt', Muhammad Al-Hajjar,  "Fath AI-'Allam", op.  cit, [5:  27]. Permissibility of selling the mortgaged asset and mortgaging its value instead of it has also been indicated by the Hanbali scholars in several cases as when they state that  "It  is  permissible  to mortgage perishable objects for an outstanding debt, so that the sale income ofsuch objects can be mortgaged, Shamsul-Din (Ibn Qudamah), "AI-Sharh AL-Kabir", op. cit, [12: 368]. The Maliki scholars state that "It is impermissible to mortgage dinars, or dirhams or filses, or food stuffs in the form of mixed ingredients or what is measured in terms ofvolume and weight, without imprinting a mark on it so that the mortgagee would not be able to use the mortgaged object and return back a similar one': Abu Abdullah Muhammad Ibn Muhammad (Al-Maghribi), "Mawahib Al-Jalil Li-Sharh Mukhtasar Khalil", Dar Al-Fikr, Second Edition, 1978, [5: 5].



981





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage and Its Contemporary Applications

perty, a borrowed asset or a rented asset.
■    The mortgage is a trust in the hands of the mortgagee and is owned by the mortgagor. The mortgagor should bear all the expenses relating to maintenance  of the proper  state of the mortgage object including all necessary outlays such as feeding, clothing, safekeeping, veterinary ser• vices and the likes.  In this  regard, the Prophet (peace be upon him) is

(19)  The Shafiee  scholars emphasized permissibility of mortgaging the asset that can permissibly be sold (even if common property,  that can be sold), Muhammad Al• Hajjar, "Fath AI-'Allam", op. cit, [5: 25]. The Hanafi scholars emphasize prohibition of mortgaging "common property........, because delivery cannot take place", Ala' Al-Din AI-Samarqandi, "Tuhfat Al-Fuqaha, op. cit, [3: 54]. It has been stated in "AI-Sharh AL• Kabir": "Mortgage ofcommon property is permissible as emphasized  by Ibn Abu Layla, AI-Nakh'i, Malik, Al-Awza'i, Al-Aniri, AI-Shfiee and Abu Thur. According to Ashab AI-Ra'y, it is impermissible except when a partner mortgage his share to his counter partner, or the two partners together mortgage their common property to one person, or one person mortgages his asset to two person so that they can possess it together': Shamsul-Deen (Ibn Qudamah), "AI-Sharh Al-Kabir", op. cit, [12: 369-370].
(20) Ibn Al-Mundhir said:  All our precedent scholars from whom we learnt unanimously agreed that when someone borrows an object from someone else so as to mortgage it for obtaining a specific amount of money from a specific person for a specific period, his act is permissible. Ibn Al-Mundhir has also reported a unanimous agreement among Fiqh scholars that if the person (in the preceding example) borrowed the object according to the above stated conditions, but he mortgaged  something  else, his act is impermissible. If such person mortgaged the borrowed object for a debt amount that exceeds what he had stated when borrowing the object, the mortgage becomes null and void either for the whole amount of the debt as emphasized by Al-Shafiee, or for the excess part only, on the basis of deal fragmentation. According to Al-Qadhi when the object to be mortgaged is borrowed without restrictions,  the process of borrowing is  permissible and the borrower can mortgage the borrowed object for any amount. This viewpoint is one oftwo viewpoints supported by AI-Shafi'i. The other viewpoint emphasized by AI-Shafiee is that mortgage of a borrowed asset is impermissible without knowledge of the amount, nature and maturity ofthe debt to be mortgaged for. When the borrowed mortgage asset perishes the guarantee resets with the mortgagor, since a borrowed property has to be guaranteed by the borrower. There is also the case when the person from whom the mortgaged asset is borrowed releases the mortgaged asset without resorting to the mortgagor, and whether he should resort to the mortgagor in this case or not. Fiqh scholars are divided between two standpoints concerning this issue, as they do with regard to the case of someone who repays the debt of someone else without his permission, Shamsul-Deen (Ibn Qudamah), "AL-Sharh AL-Kabir", [5: 148]. Electronic copy: Al-Jammf' Al-Kabir Program. As indicated in "Al-Insaf,  It is permissible to borrow or rent something so as to mortgage it,  on permission of the owner in both cases", Ala' AI-Din (Al-Mardawi), "Al-Insaf", op. cit, [5:
148-149]. Electronic copy: Al-Jami' Al-Kabir Program.



982





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage and Its Contemporary Applications

reported  to have said:  "The one who mortgages  the asset should get its benefits and bear its expenses." Since the mortgaged asset belongs to the mortgagor he should, therefore, bear its expenses as if it is still in his hands." According to the Hanafi School "expenses of a mortgaged asset are of two types: the first type includes all the expenses which relate to maintenance of the proper state of the asset and its preservation against decay, and such expenses should be borne by the mortgagor. The second type comprises expenses such as those relating to safekeeping ofthe asset, or returning it back to mortgagor, or returning back part of it which has been damaged by an accident;  and such expenses have to be borne by the mortgagee. Furthermore, the Hanafi scholars indicate: "When the mortgagee without the permission of the competent authority bears the expenses that should have been borne by the mortgagor, he is considered to have done so in donation, whereas when he does so on permission of the competent authority he has the right of recourse on the mortgagor for repayment. Similarly, the mortgagor is considered as a donor when he bears the expenses that should have been borne by the mortgagee wi• thout the permission  of the concerned authority, and should have the right ofrecourse on the mortgagee when he does so, on permission ofthe competent authority".0
•  The mortgagee does not have the right to make free of charge benefit from the mortgaged asset, because otherwise he will be committing Riha.
Rulings Relating to the Debt for Which the Mortgage Is Signed (item 3/3)

■    The mortgage contract can be signed before, along with or after the debt contract. In this regard the Hanbali scholars indicate that "signing of the mortgage contract can be visualized in terms of three cases: it can take place after signing of the debt contract and in this case it is permissible as per the unanimous viewpoint ofFiqh scholars, because the debt is already

(21) Abdullah Ibn Qudamah Al-Maqdisi Abu Muhammad, "AI-Kaf Fi Fiqh Al-Imam Al• Mubajjal Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal", AI-Maktab Al-Islami  - Beirut, [2:  146].  Electronic copy: Al-Jami' AI-Kabir Program.
(22) Ala'  Al-Din Al-Samarqandi, "Tuhfat  Al-Fuqaha,  Ihya'  A-Turath  Al-Islami •
Qatar,  [3: 59-61].



983





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage and Its Contemporary Applications

there and it needs documentation. The second case is when the mortgaged contract  is signed at the same time of signing the debt contract, as when
- for instance  - one party says to the other:  I sell to you this garment  of
mine for ten dinars payable after a month  provided that you mortgage to me your  slave Saad, and the other  party  responses: I agree to that The mortgage  contract  in this second case is also valid, according to Al-Sha• f'i and Ashab Al-Ra'y, because it is needed. The third  case is when the mortgage  contract  is signed before the debt contract,  as when  - for ins• tance - one party  says to the other:  I mortgage this slave of mine to you against lending me ten dinars. In this third  case the mortgage  contract is invalid according to the prevailing view point ofthe Hanbali School, while AI-Shafi'i considers  it to be valid.  The proponents  of the validity of the contract  in this case include also Abu Al-Khattab, Malik and Abu Hani• fah. It is argued that the mortgage contract in this case is a documentation of a valid right and therefore it can precede it, similar to the case of gua• rantee. A further justification  given by Fiqh scholars in this connection  is that the mortgage contract in this case is signed for something which will take place in the future,  and therefore  it is similar to a darak  guarantee (guarantee against occurrence  of third party claim on the asset).3
Execution of the Mortgage (item 3/4)
•  Foreclosure: According  to  Hadith:  "Mortgage should not be foreclosed from its owner who should get its benefit and bear its expenses".  The mea• ning  of this  Hadith  is that  the  failure  of the  mortgagor  to redeem  his
mortgaged  asset does not make the mortgagee entitled to that asset. This was, in fact, the practice during the Pre-Islamic period  (Jahiliyyah) when the mortgagee used to seize the mortgaged  asset in case of default.
Contemporary Applications  of Mortgage
•  Holding  the  documents which  represent the  ownership of the  goods as a mortgage  is permissible,  because  possession  of the  documents is

(23) Muwaffaq Al-Din (Ibn Qudamah), "Al-Mughni"', op. cit, [6: 444445]. Darakguarantee is a "Guarantee given to the purchaser against the case when the purchased asset turns out to be owned by a third party. See: Muhammad Al-Hajjar, "Fath AI-'Allam", op. cit, [5: 44].
(24) Mohammad Al-Hajjar, "Fath AI-'Allam", op. cit, [5: 25].



984





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage and Its Contemporary Applications

considered as possession of the goods themselves. The possessor of the documents will become authorized to dispose ofthe goods like an owner.
■    It is permissible to mortgage shares because shares represent a common
share  of Shari'ah-permissible  assets  (cash,  tangible  assets,  usufructs, rights and debts - item 3/1  of Shari'ah Standard on Financial Papers). As shown in item (7) above, some ofthe Fiqh scholars indicate that mortga• ging of common property is permissible.
■    It is permissible to mortgage Sukukbecause, similar to shares, they repre•
sent common shares in Sharf'ah-permissible assets (cash, debts, usufructs, tangible assets). The only difference between shares and Sukuk is that Sukuk can be a common share of only one type of these assets (cash, or debts or usufructs or tangible assets), [see Sharf'ah Standard on Invest• ment Sukuk]. As we have seen previously Fiqh scholars indicate that it is permissible to mortgage common property as well as cash, tangible assets and debts. Although there is no Shari'ah or Fiqh text that permits or prohibits mortgaging of usufructs, yet I can see no Shari'ah restriction against it, if such usufructs are Sharf'ah-acceptable and their mortgaging could achieve the Sharf'ah objective of "Preservation of rights and docu• mentation of debts, through sale of the mortgaged asset and repayment of the debt in case of default': Achievement of such objective appears to be possible through mortgaging of the Sukuk issued against usufructs of assets (in hand and with debtors). [see Shari'ah Standard on Investment Sukuk, 5/1/5/2]
■    Permissibility offreezing the balances of current accounts and the like as mortgages is based on the fact that this is similar to mortgaging of assets which are previously held under the guarantee of the mortgagee (assets in the hands ofthe mortgagee), which is permissible.

(25) According to the majority ofFiqh scholars (except the Shafi'i School) the account in this case becomes kept bythe institution ontrust basis, ratherthan on guarantee basis. As can be understood from what has been stated by Imam Ahmad, the mortgage becomes binding once the contract is signed The Hanbali scholars elaborate on this issue by stating: "When someone mortgages an asset which is already in the hands of the mortgagee, whether  the mortgagee has obtained such asset through borrowing, on trust basis, or forcibly ... etc, the mortgage is valid, because the asset is owned by
the mortgagor and can be possessed, hence, it can be mortgaged, as ifit is in =



985





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage and Its Contemporary Ap plications

■    It is permissible for the Institution  to retain  investment  accounts and in• vestment  units  as mortgage  because this  is considered  as mortgaging  of common property  which is permissible as has been indicted earlier in this standard. Permissibility of such mortgages can also be based on the fact that an investment  account or unit usually comprises cash, or assets, or debts, or most often a mixture of all that. As we have seen earlier mortgaging  of any of these items is permissible. Furthermore,  mortgaging  of investment accounts and units can be seen as similar to mortgages that comprise a for• givable degree of gharar, due to the changing nature of real assets as a com-

= the hands of the owner. Therefore what can be understood from this statement by Imam Ahmad is that the mortgage here becomes binding by virtue of the same contract with no need for any further act (i.e., what changes is the ruling only). According to Al-Qadi and his companions  as well as AI-Shafi'i the mortgage does not become valid without the elapse of sufficient time for possession", Shamsul-Din (Ibn Qudamah),  "AI-Sharh AL-Kabir", op. cit, [12: 406]. The author of "Al-Insaf" has also discussed this issue and added mortgaging  of an asset held by the mortgagee on the basis of a nullified contract (Ala'  Al-Din Al-Mardawi, Electronic copy: Al• Jami' Al-Kabir Program). An  important point  to be noted here is what has been quoted in "Mukhtasar Al-Insaf" and  "Al-Sharh  Al-Kabir"  on the discussion about the status of the mortgagee who is already holding the asset on guarantee  basis. The quoted statement comprises the following: "When someone mortgages an asset which is already seized or borrowed  by the mortgagee, the mortgage is valid and the guarantee of the mortgagee is cancelled according to Malik and Abu Hanifah. AI-Shafiee said that the guarantee should not be cancelled and the mortgage is valid because there is no contradiction  between the two. According to Al-Shafiee even in the mortgage arrangement the mortgagee  is committed  to guarantee in case of transgression. To me, the mortgagee has the right to hold the asset as a mortgage and he is no longer to be seen as a transgressor, yet the assertion that there is no contradiction between holding the asset as a mortgage on the one hand, and holding it through borrowing or seizure on the other, is objectionable, because a borrower or someone who takes the asset by force has to guarantee the asset whereas a mortgagee is supposed to keep the asset on trust basis rather than under guarantee. Moreover, on mortgaging the asset there will remain no reason which justifies continuation of the guarantee. If the mortgagee is to be held responsible later on for transgression against the mortgaged  asset, that will be for his transgression  rather  than for his status as a borrower or someone who has taken the asset by force", Muhammad  Ibn Abdul-Wahhab,  "Mukhtasar Al-Insaf Wa Al-Sharh  AI-Kabir",  [1: 508]  - Electronic copy: Al-Jami' Al-Kabir Program. The  Shafiee scholars  [Muhammad Al-Hajjar, "Fath Al-'Allam", op. cit, [5: 29] indicate: "The mortgaged asset is a trust in the hand of the mortgagee except in eight cases: (I) An extorted asset changed to a mortgage
in the hands of the extorter,      =



986





Shari'ah  Standard No. (39): Mortgage and Its Contemporary Ap plications

ponent of such accounts and units. As we have seen before, such mortgages are permissible according to the Maliki scholars who argue that "since the mortgagee  has the right to lend his money without  documentation,  it is only logical that he can accept documentation with some Gharar. In the fi• nal analysis something is better than nothing?Moreover, it can be argued that the unknown aspects ofthe transaction  are later on going to be known.
Contemporary Applications of Debt Mortgaging
•  It is permissible  to issue documentary credit for a client on guarantee  of a debt  owed to this  client by a third  party,  and documented by a letter of credit, a guarantee, a receipt, a commercial  paper,  a bond,  or Islamic Sukuk, because it is permissible  to mortgage  debt as we have seen earlier.
■    It is permissible  to issue documentary credit to a client against another
documentary credit  (Back-to-back credit  and  transferable   credit),  be•

(II) A mortgaged asset changed to an extorted asset, {ill) A borrowed asset changed to a mortgage, (IV)  An asset offered for sale changed to a mortgage,  (V) An asset sold through a false contract changed to a mortgage, (VI) A sold asset changed to a mortgage after termination  of the contract by the buyer,  and (VII) An  amount payable by the husband  on divorce changed to a mortgage before being received by the wife.  The justification for guarantee in these cases is the presence of the reason  which  necessitates it.  That  is to  say relaxation  of guarantee  because of mortgage is overruled by a Shari'ah requisite for guarantee because of borrowing or seizure; contrary to the case of on-trust deposit (Wadi'ah) where there is a Shari'ah prohibition against guarantee. Regarding the same issue of mortgaging an asset that is already in the hands of the mortgagee, the following has also been stated by Fiqh scholars "when the mortgaged asset is already in the hands ofthe mortgagee such as a borrowed or an extorted asset, the mortgage is valid and the guarantee is cancelled according to Malik and Abu Hanifah. AI-Shafiee argues that the guarantee should not be cancelled and the mortgage is valid because there is no contradiction between the two. According to Al-Shafi'i even in the mortgage arrangement the mortgagee is committed  to guarantee in case of transgression, and therefore the mortgage is valid along with the guarantee?'; Shamsul-Din (Ibn Qudamah),  "AI-Sharh Al-Kabir", op. Cit, [12: 407]. Ibn Qudamah then discussed the proposition  advocated by Al• Shafi'i that there is no contradiction between holding the asset as a mortgage on the one hand, or holding it through borrowing or seizure on the other. lbn Qudamah emphasized that a borrower or someone who takes the asset by force has to guarantee the asset whereas a mortgagee is supposed to keep the asset on trust basis rather than under  guarantee.  See:  "Al-Mawsuah Al-Fiqhiyyah Al-Kuwaytiyyah",  the term Al-Rahn, item (9).
(26) See:  "Al-Mawsuwah AL-Fiqhiyyah AL-Kuwaytiyyah", the term Al-Rahn, item (9).



987





Shari'ah Standard No. (39): Mortgage  and Its Contemporary Applications

cause a documentary credit results in a debt owed by the bank to the client, and such debt can be mortgaged for obtaining a new debt.
Insurance of the Mortgaged Asset
■    Insurance of the mortgaged asset is permissible because if such asset is  damaged the compensation  received can be used for replacing the mortgage; and thus continuation of the vital role of mortgage in preser• vation of rights,  documentation  of debts and facilitation of debt repay• ment and collection is ensured.












































988


















Shari'ah Standard No. (40)



Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                             993
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................        994

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                               994
2. Investment Accounts (Demand Deposits)............................................        994
3. Realization of Profit.................................................................................       998
4. Entitlement to Profit.................................................................................      1000
5. Distribution  of Profit................................................................................      1002
6. Other Rulings on Investment Accounts                                                  1003
7. Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................      1004
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1005
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1006
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard...................................       1008
Appendix (c):  Definitions............................................................................       1012























991








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to indicate the controls and rulings on distribution of profits of investment accounts in Islamic financial institutions (Institution/ Institutions)."  In  this  regard  the  standard  covers three  major  aspects including: realization of profit, entitlement to profit and profit distribution.































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



993





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers investment  accounts  managed  on the basis of Mudarabah  and the principles and conditions of realization and entitlement  to profit. The Standard also covers how profits are to be distributed  between the institution  as a Mudarib  and the holders  of investment  accounts  as Arbab al-Mal, and to discuss the procedural aspects ofprofit realization such as determination of the expenses to be charged to investment accounts and the allocations and reserves to be deducted from the profits. The standard  does not cover the accounts managed  on the basis of investment  agency because such accounts require a separate standard.

2. Investment Accounts (Demand Deposits)

2/1  Definition and types of investment accounts

These are the amounts which the institution  receives from inves• tors  on  the basis of participatory  Mudarabah  (al-Mudarabah al• Mushtarakah). The holders of such accounts delegate the institution to invest their funds through Mudarabah. Investment accounts can be divided into two types. The first type is investment accounts that are managed on the basis of unrestricted Mudarabah where the Mudarib is delegated to invest the Mudarabah funds in any field ofinvestment he deems suitable. The second type is investment accounts which are managed on the basis of restricted Mudarabah, where the Mudarib has to invest the Mudarabah funds in a specific type of investment to be determined by Rab al-Mal (owner of the capital). The relationship between the holders ofthese accounts and the institution is the typical relationship between the Mudarib (the work provider) and Rab al• Mal.



994





Shari' ah Standard No. (40 ): Di stribution of Profit in Mudarabah -Based Investm ent Accoun ts

2/1/1  Unrestricted investment accounts

These are the amounts received from investors who authorize the institution to invest their funds on the basis ofMudarabah without restricting the investment of such funds to a specific project or investment program. The holders of the accounts and the institution share the profit, ifany, according to the ratio specified for each ofthem either in the Mudarabah contract or in the application for opening the account. The holders of the accounts bear all the losses in proportion  to their respective shares in the capital, except losses arising from transgression, negligence or breach of the contract, which have to be borne by the institution.

2/1/2 Restricted investment accounts

These are the amounts whose owners authorize the institu• tion to invest them on the basis of Mudarabah  in a specific project or investment program. The holder of the account and the institution  share the profit, if any, according to the ratio  specified for each of them  either  in the Mudarabah contract  or in the application for opening the account. The holder ofthe account bears all the losses in proportion to his share in the capital, except losses arising from transgression, negligence or breach of contract, which have to be borne by the institution.

2/1/3 Equality in investment opportunities

In principle, equality in investment opportunities  should be ensured between shareholders'  funds  and the  funds  of the holders ofthe investment accounts in participatoryMudarabah. In case a different policy is to be adopted, the institution should disclose that before disposition, with due consideration to the relevant regulatory restrictions and the conditions of opening the accounts.

(2) Restricted investment accounts can be managed on the basis of investment agency.



995





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

2/2 The difference between an investment  account and a current account and its likes

2/2/1 The current accounts are the amounts which the institution receives from clients who are not seeking investment.  Such amounts represent loans which the institution has to guarantee their repayment on demand without any increment. The institution has the right to dispose ofsuch amounts and invest them  for its own benefit and under  its own responsibility, preferably after indicating this in the application for opening the account.   As regards investment accounts, these are the amounts deposited with the institution  on trust  basis, and hence the  institution  is not  committed  to  guarantee  their repayment,  except in  case of transgression,  negligence or breach of the contract.

2/2/2 The institution should guarantee full repayment of the amounts of the current  accounts to their holders,  whereas it should not  assume the  commitment  to  pay any fixed or variable increment on the principal amounts of such accounts, because such payment constitutes usurious interest. The institution is not committed to guarantee investment accounts. It is only committed to distribute their profit or loss among their holders as per the ratios agreed upon.

2/2/3 Saving accounts which carry no authorization  for investing them to the benefit of their holders shall become subject to the rulings on current  accounts, whereas those which carry such authorization  shall become  subject to the  rulings on investment accounts.

2/2/4 The institution may charge fees (commissions) for the services of opening investment accounts.  Such  fee has to be a lump

(3) For more rulings on current accounts as regards, for instance, charging fees for keeping such accounts or distribution of prizes to them see Shari'ah Standard No. (19) on Loan (Qard).



996





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

sum amount which should preferably not exceed the average actual cost, and should be charged once at the time of opening the account.

2/2/5 In case of depositing coins or paper money by handing them over to the cashier the institution may charge a fee for trans• portation, storage and counting  of the deposited  amounts. This, however, does not include amounts  transferred  to the account ofthe institution.

2/2/6 In transference ofmoney between accounts constructive pos• session is sufficient, whether  for the same currency  or dif• ferent currencies, because the process involves exchange and transference.  [see Shari'ah Standard No.  (1) on Trading  in Currencies]

2/2/7 The funds which the institution  fails to transfer  to owners because of change of address shall be kept  in a suspended account for the specified period  before being added to the charity account. If the addresses of the owners of such funds came to be known later on the funds should be paid out to them from the charity account. In this regard, a clause should be added to the conditions for opening the accounts indicating that the holders of the accounts agree to donate for charitable purposes any amounts which could not be transferred to them within a specific period due to change of address.

2/2/8 In principle, the institution should resort, through  exchange of correspondence, to holders of the accounts when there is any change in the conditions or profit sharing ratios. However, due to the difficulty and cost involved in such process the institution may send notifications, or advertise the new changes in its website so that the implicit acceptance of the concerned parties is obtained if no protest is received from them within a specific period. The changes in question, which shall become  effective starting  from  the  beginning  of the next period, should be incorporated  in the conditions of the



997





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

accounts,  with due reference to the procedure  followed for their adoption.

2/2/9 It is permissible  to stipulate  the  authoritative  status  of the documents  and financial statements ofthe institution, unless such documents  and statements are proved to be wrong by the accountholder. If dispute  arises the two parties  should resort to experts, arbitration  or law.

2/2/10 The cost ofproving the accusation shall be borne by the accoun•
tholder when he files the claim against the institution.

3. Realization of Profit

Realization of distributable profits should be subject to the following:

3/1  Safety of the capital

3/1/1  Realization ofprofit in investment accounts does not take place before protecting the capital. Any amount ofprofit distributed before ensuring such protection  is considered as an advance payment, rather than realized profit [see item 5/3]. The profit authorized for investment at the end of the investment period is considered as part of the capital in the next period.

3/1/2 Actual and constructive liquidation

Realization of profit  in investment  accounts  does not  take place before the following steps:

3/1/2/1 Liquidation of Mudarabah assets, which can be either actual liquidation where all the assets are converted into cash and all debts are collected, or it can be constructive liquidation where, in addition to cash amounts, noncash assets are valued by experts,  along with valuation of all debts with regard to possibilities of collection and appropriate allocations for bad debts.

3/1/2/2  Covering of the following expenses:
a) Expenses relating to utilization of the balances of the investment accounts by charging each operation with the direct expenses incurred in its execution.



998





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

b) The share ofthe balances ofthe investment accounts from shared expenses, excluding expenses relating to the institution's  own activities.
Investment accounts should also not be charged with the expenses ofthe tasks which have to be performed by the Mudarib. Such expenses include the expenses ofthe investment departments and the bodies which endorse their decisions as well as the expenses of the follow-up  and  accounting  departments. It is also permissible  to  specify  a ceiling for the  expenses above which all the expenses are to be borne by the Mudarib.

3/1/2/3 Deduction of the allocations and reserves relating to the investment, from investment  income so as to arrive at distributable profit. In this case, allocations for bad debts and reserve for rate of returns have to be deducted from gross profit, whereas reserve for investment risks has to be deducted after deduction of the Mudarib's share.

3/2  In realization of the profit the following  should be observed

3/2/1 When  loss is incurred  in one Mudarabah operation  it can be covered from the profits of other operations, and if it exceeds the  profits  it  should be  covered  from  capital. What  should really matter  is the  final  result  of liquidation   at the  end  of the  financial  period  specified by the  institution.  The loss of a certain  financial  period  should  not  be  covered  from  the
profits of another period,  except in the case of covering losses from reserves.

3/2/2 Due  to  the  fact  that  unrestricted  investment  accounts   of continuous  participatory  Mudarabah  lack  coincidence   in the beginnin g and end of the process  of depositing funds  in the  accounts,  the  profit from  the  operations which  extend to succeeding  periods  has to be distributed over the  whole period of such  operations in proportion to the  duration of each operation.



999





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

4. Entitlement to Profit

4/1  The method  of profit distribution  should be well known so that no room is left for uncertainty and dispute. Distribution of profits should also be in terms of ratios, and not at all by specifying a lump sum amount or a percentage ofthe capital for any party, or any other method that could lead to avoidance ofsharing ofthe profit between the two parties.

4/2 Specification of profit  ratios  for the  two parties  should  not  be postponed beyond the time of signing the contract. When the two parties do not specify such ratios at the time of signing the contract normal practice can be sought - if any - as when, for instance, profit is normally shared  on equal basis.  If there is no normal practice to resort to the Mudarabah  contract becomes null and void, the Mudarib is entitled to the wage normally paid for similar work, and the whole profit goes to Rab al-Mal.

4/3 The institution can specify different ratios for distribution of profits between  itself and  different  categories of holders  of investment accounts, or it can specify a unified ratio for all  The ratios  for distribution ofprofits among the holders ofthe investment accounts can also be unified or varying on the basis of certain weights.

4/4 When one ofthe two parties stipulates a lump sum amount for himself the Mudarabah  contract  becomes null and void. This restriction, however, does not include the case when the two parties agree that if the profit exceeds certain limit or index the excess amount should be taken by one of them. If the profit is at that limit/index or below it shall be shared as agreed upon between the two parties.

4/5 It is impermissible to earmark the profit of a specific type or portion of the capital or the assets into which capital is converted, for one of the two parties.  It is also impermissible to allocate the profit of a certain financial period or a specific transaction for one party, and the profit ofanother financial period or a specific transaction for the other.



1000





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

4/6 The method agreed upon for distribution of profit can be fixed for the whole period, or variable according to specific sub-periods of partial liquidation.

4/7  When the Mudarib mixes the Mudarabah funds with his own funds, he becomes a partner by subscribing his funds and a Mudarib for the Mudarabah funds of the other party. In this case the profit has to be divided between the two amounts ofcapital, so that the Mudarib can get the profit ofhis work as well as the profit ofhis funds as a partner. The profit share of the Mudarib as a partner  shall become subject to the same treatment  of the shares of the holders of investment accounts.  [see item 4/3]

4/8 In principle, the profit belongs to the institution and the holder of the account, yet the two parties can agree on allocation of a certain part ofthe profit to the benefit ofa third party. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (13) on Mudarabah, item 8]

4/9 It is permissible for the accountholder to exit from the Mudarabah with all his funds or part of them.  Such  exit represents the desire of the accountholder to redeem his share in the Mudarabah assets without withdrawing the total amount deposited in his account or part of it. It is permissible for the institution in this case to specify the amount relating to the exit so that it can earn no profit, or less than the profit it would have earned in the absence of exit. Such arrangement  constitutes exit on the basis of supply and demand, rather than deprivation from profit.

4/10 The ratios of the amounts  deposited in the investment  accounts which the institution retains for liquidity purposes - may be stated in the conditions ofthe accounts - has to be treated as follows:

4/10/1 The case could be that the bank never invests such amounts because they are withheld in the accounts ofthe central bank or the bank's treasury for the sake of meeting requests for withdrawal from investment accounts, hence there is no re• turn for which a ruling can be indicated here.



1001





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

4/10/2 Or  the  case may  be  that  the  bank  utilizes  such  funds  in short  term  or  easy-to-liquidate  investments  so as to  cater for applications for withdrawal  from  investment  accounts  • although  the  bank  sometimes  stipulates  in  the  conditions of the  accounts  that  such funds  are allocated  for liquidity purposes. In this case it is permissible for the bank  to invest such funds without obtaining the consent ofthe holders ofthe accounts, because the bank is authorized  for any disposition that serves the interest of the two parties of the unrestricted Mudarabah  contract.  When  a return  is earned  from  such investment  it should be added  to the investment  base. The holders of the account will be entitled to a share in this profit in their capacity as Arbab al-Mal, and the bank is entitled to its share as a Mudarib, subject to the ratios  agreed upon. If, instead, a loss is incurred  from investment  of the amounts, without any transgression  or negligence from the side of the bank, it should  be borne  by the holders  of the accounts  in their capacity as Arbab al-Mal.

5. Distribution  of Profit

5/1  Application of scoring method of profit distribution:

With due consideration to items 4/3 and 4/4, the scoring method for distribution  of profit among the participants  of general investment accounts  can be used. Such method takes into account the amount contributed  by  each  investor   and  the  period   of its  stay  in  the investment  (currency  unit  x  time  unit).  Each  account  is  given a certain number of scores depending on its amount  and the period of stay  of that  amount  in  the  investment even  if depositing and withdrawal have repeatedly been done and the amount varied from time  to time. The holders  of the accounts  are considered  to have implicitly exchanged mutual  relief from commitment (Mubara 'ah) for any aspects that practically cannot be catered for.

5/2  There  is no prohibition against setting  an expected  rate  of return which is not considered  to be binding  if not achieved,  even if it is



1002





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

reached  through  a feasibility study.  However,  final  distribution of profits should be based on realization of profit after actual or constructive liquidation, rather than on such expected rate ofreturn.
5/3 It is permissible to pay advance amounts to the holders ofthe accounts before actual or constructive liquidations so that final settlement can be made later on. After actual or constructive liquidation the institution is committed to make necessary additions to,  or deductions from, the advanced amounts so that each holder of an investment account receives his exact share of the profit.

5/4 Mutual relieffrom commitments (Mubara' ah) in case ofexit should be stipulated in the contracts of the Mudarabah-based  investment accounts.  The  stipulation  should  indicate  that  the  exiting party reliefs the holders ofthe accounts (the depositors) from commitment towards his rights in any undistributed  or non-apparent  profit, as well as his rights in the remaining part ofthe reserves for investment risks and rate of return,  and the remaining part of allocations for debts. Similarly, the stipulation should state that the holders of the accounts  relief the  exiting party  from  commitment  towards  any losses that have not yet become apparent. The stipulation should also indicate that on liquidation  of the investment base the remaining parts  of the  above mentioned  reserves and  allocations  shall be devoted to charitable purposes.

5/5 Institutions should liquidate Mudarabah and distribute the realized profit  between  the  Mudarib  and  the  holders  of the  investment accounts according to the conditions ofthe Mudarabah contract.

5/6 When the shareholders in their capacity as the Mudarib,  decide • after liquidation ofthe Mudarabah and preparation ofthe profit and loss account - to relinquish part oftheir profit share to the benefit of the accountholders, the institution should disclose that.

6. Other Rulings on Investment Accounts

The rulings which have not been stipulated in this Standard can be seen in Sharf'ah Standard No. (13) on Mudarabah.



1003





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

7. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 26 Jumada II, 1430 A.H., corresponding to
19 June 2009 A.D.




















































1004





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts





Adoption of the Standard


The  Sharf'ah  Board adopted  the  Standard  on  Investment  accounts and Profit Distribution on its meeting No. (24), held in Al-Madinah Al• Munawwarah,  on 25-26  Jumada  II,  1430  A.H., corresponding to  18-19
June 2009 A.D.











































1005





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No.  (10) held on 2-7  Rabi' I, 1424 A.H., corresponding to 3-8 May 2003 A.D., in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah, Kingdom ofSaudi Arabia, the Sharf'ah Board decided to issue a Shari'ah Standard on bank deposits and distribution ofprofits .

On 7 Dhul-Hajjah 1424 A.H., corresponding to 29 January 2004 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee (1) decided to commission a Sharf'ah consultant to prepare a study on bank deposits and distribution of profits.

In its meeting No. (16) held on 8-9 Jumada I, 1426 A.H., corresponding to 15-16 June 2005 A.D., in the Kingdom OfBahrain, the Shari'ah Standards Committee ( 1) discussed the draft ofthe Standard and introduced necessary changes.

In its meeting No. (17) held on 8-9 Sha'ban 1426 A.H., corresponding to 8-9  September 2005 A.D., in the Kingdom of Bahrain, the  Shari'ah Standard Committee (1) discussed the draft ofthe Standard and introduced necessary changes.

In its meeting No.  (15) held on 22 Sha'ban  1426  A.H., corresponding to  30  September 2005  A.D., in Makkah Al-Mukarramah,  the  Sharf'ah Board discussed the draft of the Standard,  and decided,  in the light of the discussions and observations of the meeting, to send the draft of the Standard to Shari'ah Standards Committee (1) for study.

In a meeting held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on 1   Safar 1427 A.H., corresponding to 1  March 2006 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) discussed the draft of the Standard and introduced necessary changes in the light ofthe observations of the meeting.



1006





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

In its meeting No. (17) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, on 26 Shawwal
1427 A.H., corresponding to 18 November 2006 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed the amendments suggested by the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) and introduced necessary changes.

In  its meeting No. (22) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain,  on 28-30
Dhul-Qadah  1430  A.H.,  corresponding  to 26-28  November 2008  A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the draft of the Standard and introduced necessary changes.

The Secretarial General ofAAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 6 Rabi' II, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 2 April 2009 A.D. More than 30 participants attended the public hearing as representatives of central banks, institutions, and accounting firms. The public hearing was also attended by Shari'ah scholars, university teachers and other interested parties. Several observations were made in the public hearing, and duly responded to by the members of the Shari'ah Standards  Committees (1) and (2).

In its meeting No. (23) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on 15--17 Rabf' I, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 12-15 March 2009 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed the draft ofthe Standard and introduced necessary changes.

In its meeting No. (24) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah, on 25-26
Jumada II, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 18-19 June 2009 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the draft of the Standard, introduced necessary changes and adopted the Standard.


















1007





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


The current account is considered as a loan because the bank has to guar• antee its repayment  on demand.  In this regard the International Islam• ic Fiqh Academy issued its resolution  No. 86 (9/3) which stipulates that "Demand  deposits  (current accounts) whether  in Islamic or traditional banks are loans in the strict Shari'ah sense. The receiving bank holds such deposits under guarantee and is committed  by Sharf'ah to repay them on demand.  The fact that the receiving bank  is solvent does not affect this
ruling"

Rulings and Conditions relating to Profit
• Profit has to be known  because it constitutes the  object of contracting, and therefore ignorance about it nullifies the contract.
■  It is impermissible in Mudarabah  to specify the return  for any of the two
parties in terms ofa lump sum amount or a certain percentage ofthe capital, because  such  specification  eliminates  profit  sharing  which  constitutes a fundamental  aspect of the Mudarabah  contract.  By such specification, the very essence of partnership will be lost when, for instance, the profit earned is just equal to the lump sum amount or percentage of the capital earmarked for one party.
• Permissibility of applying the scoring method of profit distribution is based on the fact that the funds of the participants  in the same investment base have all contributed to achievement  of the return  as per their respective amounts  and  periods  of stay in  the  accounts.  The  scoring  method  is the most  equitable method  of accounting  in hand  that  can be used for assigning profit shares commensurate to the amounts  and their periods of stay  in  the  accounts.  However,  entering  into  investment   on  such basis necessitates mutual  relief from  commitments (Mubara'ah) among investors with regard to any part of entitlement  that could not be catered



1008





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

for through  this method. It is a well established principle in Figh literature that much more exemptions can be allowed in partnership-based dealings (Musharakat) than  in  exchange-based  dealings  (Mu'awadah)  and  that division (Qismah)  through  approximation of shares is based on mutual consent.
• Charging  the  Mudarabah   expenses  in  the  way shown in the  Standard takes into  consideration  what  should  be done  by the  Mudarib  for the sake of carrying out his investment  decisions on receipt of the funds, and his commitment to do the work which entails having the bodies required for that purpose. A resolution to this effect has also been issued by the Al Baraka Seminar (4/1).
• Impermissibility  of charging interest  for loans is based  on the fact that such charge constitutes Riha. In this regard the international Islamic Fiqh Academy issued its resolution  No. (10/2) stipulating that "whether  such increment  is charged for postponement of a defaulted debt, or as an in• terest on the loan stipulated  since the time of signing the contract, both increments  are forms of Shari'ah-prohibited Riba.
• Impermissibility of postponing specification  of profit ratios for the two Mudarabah parties until the profit is earned is based on the fact that such postponement leads to Jahalah  (ignorance) which could lead to dispute. On the contrary, agreement between the two parties - at time of distribu• tion - on changing the ratios agreed upon or donating part of the profit is a right that the two parties may permissibly exercise.
• Impermissibility of final distribution of the profit between the stakeholders of the company before deduction  of expenses, allocations and reserves is the Shari'ah principle that no profit is to be sought before preservation  of the capital.
• Permissibility  of distributing the profit on the basis of constructive liq•
uidation  and  after ensuring  the safety of the capital is based  on accep•
tance of valuation  in Shari'ahin several applications  including  Zakah

(4) See the Forth Resolution of the Muslim World League in  its 15  Session, held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, on 21-26/10/1422 A.H.; Resolution No.  30(5/4) of the International Islamic Fiqh Academy; and Fatwa No. (2/8) of the 8 Seminar of the Al Baraka, Fatawa Al Baraka,  (P. 134).



1009





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

as well as theft incidents. In this context, the Prophet  (peace be upon him) is reported to have said:  "When someone liberates a slave he owns with other parties, he should pay partners from his money, and ifhe has no money the slave has to be equitably valuedfor him".  (5
■  The Shari'ah basis for the  ruling that  no profit has to be sought in Mudarabah  before  preservation  of the  capital  is the  Hadith  of the Prophet (peace be upon him) who said:  "A prayer performer is just like a merchant who obtains profit only after preserving his capital. Similarly
a prayer performer cannot get his Nafilah  (voluntary prayer) accepted before he performs Faridah (obligatory prayer)."° This Hadith indicates
that profit sharing is inacceptable before preservation ofthe capital. This is so because profit is an increment which cannot be obtained before obtaining the principal.
■  The Mudarabah contract becomes null and void when the two parties refrain from specifying profit sharing ratios and fail to find any established normal practice of profit sharing  applicable to their  case.  This ruling is based on the fact that ignorance about profit, which constitutes the contracting object, must nullify the contract.
• Profit sharing ratios can be commensurate to shareholding ratios or not, because profit is deserved for contribution of funds, work or guarantee. When any ofthese three aspects is fulfilled there is no Shari'ah prohibition for the partners to specify profit sharing ratios on mutual consent. This viewpoint is adopted in the Hanbali School.
■  The Shari'ah basis for impermissibility of agreement between the two parties on charging the whole loss to one ofthem or using disproportion• ate ratios for loss distribution is the statement ofAli Ibn Abu Talib who is reported to have said: "Profit is to be distributed as per the agreement of

(5) "Sahih Muslim" [2: 1140].
(6) Related by Al-Bayhaqi in "Al-Sunan" quoting Ali Ibn Abu Talib. Al-Bayhaqi mentioned that the chain of transmission  of this Hadith includes a weak narrator:  "Al-Mawsuah AL-Fiqhiyyah" [38: 74].
(7) "AIL-Hidayah Sharh AL-Bidayah" by AI-Mirghinani, [3: 3-8], Al-Maktabah Al-Islamiyyah;
"Bada 'f' AI-Sana'i" by AI-Kasani, [6: 62-63]; and "AL-Mubdi" by Ibn Muslih [5: 4], AI• Maktab Al-Islami, Beirut, 1400 A.H.



1010





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts

the two parties, whereas loss should be borne according to the ratios of contribution  to the capital?" A condition which stipulates that the loss of one party should be borne by the other party is invalid because it is oppressive and would lead to reaping ofunlawful gain by one party at the expense of the other.
■  It is permissible  for the two parties to stipulate a condition  that when
profit exceeds certain limit or index the whole additional amount should be taken by one ofthem, because such condition is permissible according to Sharf'ah if it happens to be stipulated.
■  It is impermissible to agree on earmarking the profit of a specific portion ofthe capital for one party and the profit ofthe remaining portion for the other, because such arrangement could jeopardize the process of profit sharing and lead to oppression.
• Permissibility ofagreement between the two parties to change profit sharing ratios at any time, stems from the fact that the two parties are the sole owners ofthe profit, and agreement between them to change its distribution ratios does not entail a Shari'ah-prohibited act, such as discarding away the principle ofprofit sharing."
• Permissibility of agreement on fixed or variable ratios ofprofit distribution is based on the validity of such agreement since it has been the result of mutual consent. The only restriction is that such agreement should observe the Shari'ah ruling that neither of the two parties should be deprived from his share in the profit.
• Regarding constructive  liquidation  a resolution has been issued by the
Islamic Fiqh Academy of Makkah Al-Mukarramah.

(8) Related by lbn Abu Shaybah in his "Musannaf" [4:  268], Maktabat Al-Rushd Press, Riyadh.
(9) See the proceedings of the 10 A Baraka Seminar  - Fatwa No.  (8) and the 4 AL
Baraka Seminar - Fatwa No.  (5). This viewpoint is also supported by a Fatwa issued by the Sharf'ah Board of the Faisal Islamic bank of Sudan (P.  107)  and published in the Manual of Shari'ah Fatawa of the Center of Islamic Economic of the International Islamic Bank, (P. 53).
(10) The 4 Resolution of the  16  Session,  held by the Islamic Fiqh Academy of the Muslim World League. This viewpoint has also been adopted by the 8 Al Baraka Seminar (Fatwa No. 2).



1011





Shari'ah Standard No. (40): Distribution of Profit in Mudarabah-Based Investment Accounts





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Deposit (Wadi'ah)

Funds given to someone for safekeeping

Bank Deposit
Funds which  individuals  and institutions  entrust  the bank  to keep, provided that the bank assumes the commitment  to repay such funds or their equivalent to depositors or any other specific person, on demand or subject to the conditions agreed upon.

Demand Deposit (Current Deposit)
Demand deposit is the means whereby a current account is established. The current account can be defined as: The funds deposited by their owners with the bank so as to be ready for withdrawal on need. The bank assumes the responsibility of immediate repayment of such funds on demand, and without any type of prior notification.

Savings Deposit (Savings Account)

Small cash deposits which individuals cut from their incomes and pay to the bank so as to open saving accounts for them. The owners of such accounts have the right to withdraw the whole or part of the balances of their accounts at any time.















1012

























Shari'ah Standard No. (41)



Islamic Reinsurance












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface...................................................................................................      1017
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................      1018

1. Scope of the Standard..............................................................................      1018
2. Definition of Reinsurance.......................................................................      1018
3. Shari'ah Status of Reinsurance                                                                1018
4. Key Methods ofReinsurance..................................................................      1019
5. Key Forms of Reinsurance Requests......................................................      1019
6. Controls on Reinsurance with Traditional Reinsurance Companies...     1019
7.  Shari'ah Status of Compensations and Commissions Presented to Is-
lamic Insurance Companies by Traditional Reinsurance Companies...      1020
8. Shari'ah  Controls  on  Practicing  Islamic  Reinsurance  by  Islamic
Reinsurance Companies...........................................................................      1021
9. Financial Gains Received from Islamic Reinsurance Companies......      1021
10. Date of Issuance ofthe Standard.............................................................      1022
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1023
Appendices
Appendix (a):  BriefHistory ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1024
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard...................................       1026
Appendix (c):  Definitions............................................................................       1034
Appendix (d):  A Model Reinsurance Agreement Issued by Islamic
Insurance Company - Jordan................................................      1036













1015








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to illustrate the rules and principles of Shari'ah that govern Islamic reinsurance and indicate the controls which Islamic insur• ance and reinsurance  companies as well as Islamic financial institutions (Institution/Institutions)   should observe in dealing with traditional  in• surance and reinsurance companies. The overall objective of the standard is to facilitate transference of risks and increasing of insurance capacity.




























(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions  including Islamic Banks.



1017





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers Islamic reinsurance and participation with tradi• tional insurance or reinsurance companies. The Standard does not cover Islamic insurance which has already been covered in a separate standard.

2. Definition of Reinsurance

2/1 Islamic  Reinsurance  refers  to  the  agreement  among  insurance companies, on behalf of the insurance funds under their management, to  devise a mechanism  for  the  avoidance  of part  of the  risks which the insurance  funds may encounter. On the basis of such agreement a reinsurance fund which has a distinct legal personality and independent  financial liability is formed up through  malting contributions  out of the insurance  funds  paid by the insurance clients on the basis ofdonation. The reinsurance fund, thus formed, assumes the task of covering part of the risks encountered by the insurance funds.

2/2 Reinsurance, as described above, constitutes the Islamic alternative for the reinsurance provided by traditional reinsurance companies, which  is based  on  exchange of the  reinsurance  premiums  and compensation, rather than on donation commitments.

3. Shari'ah Status of Reinsurance

3/1  Sharf'ah status oflslamic reinsurance:

3/1/1  It is permissible to reinsure with Islamic reinsurance companies.

3/2  Shari'ah status of reinsurance with traditional reinsurance companies:

It is impermissible for Islamic insurance companies to reinsure with traditional reinsurance companies, except when such reinsurance is sought as a transitional  arrangement  stemming from public need which amounts to necessity.



1018





Shari'ah Standard No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance

4. Key Methods of Reinsurance

With regard to the scope of commitment of the reinsurer, reinsurance can take place through one of the following two forms:

4/1 Selective reinsurance: In this case the insurance  company presents the individual riskwhich constitutes the subject matter ofreinsurance to the reinsurer along with a summary of all the information related to it, so that the reinsurer  can study the information and decide whether to accept the risk or not. The reinsurance company (insurer) becomes committed to what it accepts.

4/2 Comprehensive  reinsurance  (reinsurance  agreement): In this case the reinsurance company assumes the commitment to accept all the risks which fall within the scope of the agreement signed with the insurance company.

5. Key Forms of Reinsurance Requests

5/1  Risk sharing reinsurance: The insurance company in this case seeks reinsurance for a percentage of the insurance policies it issues (50% or 25%), whether  such coverage is within or in excess of its own insurance capacity.

5/2 Excess risk  reinsurance   (beyond  risk  tolerance):  The  insurance company keeps all the insurance policies which it can easily tolerate their risks and seeks reinsurance for those which involve risks that it cannot tolerate.

5/3  Loss reinsurance: According to this type ofreinsurance the reinsurance company assumes the responsibility of bearing the losses beyond the specific limit agreed upon. This form ofreinsurance is widely used in the insurances which involve big amounts.  The insurance company bears, for instance, the first 20 thousand dollars of compensation for the accident, while the reinsurance company bears the rest.

6. Controls on Reinsurance with Traditional Reinsurance Companies

In reinsuring with traditional reinsurance companies, Islamic insurance companies should observe the following controls:



1019





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance

6/1 Islamic insurance  companies  should  reinsure  first with  Islamic reinsurance companies, to the largest possible extent.

6/2 Islamic insurance companies should not keep any cash reserves for ongoing risks, that belong to traditional reinsurance companies and on which interest has to be paid. Nevertheless, an agreement can be reached between the Islamic insurance company and the traditional reinsurance  company in order to specify a certain portion  of the premiums  payable to the traditional  reinsurance  company  to be retained by the Islamic insurance company. The Islamic insurance companycaninvestretainedfunds throughMudarabahor investment agency, where the Islamic insurance company assumes the role of the  Mudarib  and  the  traditional  reinsurance  company  assumes the role of Rab al-Mal When profit is distributed as per the ratios agreed upon, the share of the traditional reinsurance company is to be added to its account with the Islamic insurance company, whereas the share of the profit earned by the Islamic insurance company for performing the investment as an independent  personality is to be added to the account ofthe participants.

6/3 The periods ofthe reinsurance agreements sought by Islamic insur• ance companies from traditional reinsurance companies should be commensurate to the actual need.

6/4 Before signing agreements with traditional reinsurance companies, Is• lamic insurance companies should seek the approval oftheir Sharf'ah Supervisory Boards.

6/5 Islamic insurance companies should stick to the minimum  size of reinsurance  with traditional  reinsurance  companies, and Shari'ah Boards should undertake follow-up in this connection.

7. Shari'ah Status of Compensations and Commissions Presented to Islamic
Insurance Companies by Traditional Reinsurance Companies

7/1  It is permissible for Islamic insurance companies to receive the amounts of the insurance coverage from traditional reinsurance companies.



1020





Shari'ah Standard No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance

7/2 It is impermissible for  an  Islamic  insurance company  to  receive reinsurance commission from  a traditional reinsurance company. Nevertheless,  the Islamic insurance company  has the right to seek premium discounts from the traditional reinsurance company.
7/3 Islamic insurance companies should not accept any redistributions of insurance  surplus forwarded  by traditional reinsurance  companies. Nonetheless, Islamic insurance companies can request premium discounts  from traditional reinsurance  companies.
8. Shari'ah  Controls  on  Practicing  Islamic  Reinsurance  by Islamic
Reinsurance Companies

8/1 Islamic reinsurance companies  should observe the Shari'ah controls on the activities of Islamic insurance companies  indicted  in Sharf'ah Standard No.  (26) on Islamic Insurance,  with  due consideration to the fact that the participants in this case are the insurance companies.

8/2  Formation of a Shari'ah Supervisory Board to supervise the process of establishing the Islamic reinsurance company, verify its contracts and documents,  overview its applications and submit Shari'ah reports on its activities.

8/3 It is permissible for the  Islamic  reinsurance company to provide reinsurance services to traditional insurance companies,  subject  to the following conditions:

1.   The contract  to be used should be the Islamic reinsurance  con•
tract.

2.  There should be no linkage.

3.  Reinsurance  should not involve a Shari'ah prohibited  object.

9. Financial Gains Received from Islamic Reinsurance Companies

All  financial  gains  which  Islamic  insurance   companies  receive  from Islamic reinsurance  companies are considered as lawful gains and should be credited to the account ofpolicyholders (the participant companies of the reinsurance  scheme), as part  of revenues.



1021





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance

10. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 2 Dhul-Qadah 1430 A.H., corresponding to 21 October 2009 A.D.




















































1022





Shari'ah Standard No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance





Adoption of the Standard


The  Shari'ah  Board adopted  the  draft  of the  Standard  on Islamic Reinsurance in its 25th meeting held during  the period  of 2-4 Dhul• Qa'dah 1430 A.H., corresponding to 21-23 October 2009 A.D.













































1023





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


In its meeting No.  (16) held in Al-Madinah  Al-Munawarah,  during the period of 7-12 Jumada I, 1427 A.H., corresponding  to 3-8 June 2006
A.D, the Shari'ah Board decided to issue a Shari'ah Standard on Islamic
Reinsurance.

On  12 Rajah  1427 A.H., corresponding  to 6 August 2005 A.D., the General Secretariat decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Islamic Reinsurance and Participation with Traditional Companies.

In ajoint meeting held in the Kingdom ofBahrain, on 18 Safar 1428 A.H., corresponding to 8 March 2007 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) discussed the study, approved it and required the consultant to prepare the exposure draft ofthe Standard.

In a further joint meeting held in Manama, the Kingdom of Bahrain, on
15 Jumada I, 1428 A.H., corresponding to 31 May 2007 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committees  (1) and  (2)  discussed the  draft of the  Standard and necessary amendments were made in the light of the discussions and observations ofthe meeting.

In its meeting No. (19) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, during the period of26-30 Sha'ban 1428 A.H., corresponding to 8-12 September 2007
A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the draft of the Standard and made the
amendments which it deemed necessary.

The  General  Secretariat  held  a public  hearing  in  the  Kingdom  of
Bahrain,  on  8  Jumada  II,  1429  A.H.,  corresponding  to  12  June  2008
A.D.  The public hearing was attended by more than thirty participants



1024





Shari'ah Standard No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance

representing central banks, institutions, accounting firms, Shari'ah scholars, academics and others interested in this field. The members of the Shari'ah Standards  Committees (1) and (2) duly responded to several comments and observations that were made in the public hearing.

In its meeting No.  (25) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain,  during the period of2-4 Dhul-Qa'dah 1430 A.H., corresponding to 21-23 October 2009
A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the draft of the Standard, incorporated
the necessary amendments that it deemed appropriate,  and adopted the
Standard.











































1025





Shari'ah Standard No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


• Impermissibility of commercial reinsurance is based on the fact that the idea of commercial reinsurance depends on the idea of commercial in• surance and involves Shari'ah-prohibited Gharar. As related by Muslim, Ashab al-Sunan and others, quoting Abu Hurayrah, the Prophet (peace be upon him) prohibited Bay' al-Gharar(aleatory sale). Gharar, as defined by several Fiqh scholars, indicates uncertainty about the outcomes, or the consequences, or end result of something. According to some contem• porary Fiqh scholars Gharar is similar to or part ofbetting or gambling." A number of resolutions on prohibition of Gharar have also been issued by Islamic Fiqh Academies including the Resolution of the Islamic Fiqh Academy-Makkah Al-Mukarramah in its 1398 A.H. Session, endorsing the Resolution of the Supreme Council of the Ulema of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in its 10 Session held in Riyadh on 4 Rabi' II, 1397 A.H., and Resolution No. (9) 9/1 ofthe International Islamic Fiqh Academy.
• Permissibility ofcooperative insurance stems from the fact that cooperative insurance companies are based on cooperation and donation rather than on exchange-based dealings. It is a well-known as Fiqh axiom that Gharar does not affect donation-based contracts.  Permissibility of cooperative insurance can also be derived from several Verses ofthe Glorious Qur'an

(2) "Sahih Muslim", Kitab AL-Buy' [3: 115]; "Sunan Abu Dawud" [2: 22]), (H: 3376); "Sunan Al-Nasa'i" [2:  21]; "Sunan Ibn Majah" [2: 73]; "Sunan AI-Tirmizi"  [3: 532]; "Sunan Al• Darami" [2:  16]);  "AI-Muwatta""  [2:  66]);  "Musnad Ahmad" [1:  201, 2:  367 and  397]; "Sunan Al-Bayhaqi" [5: 22]; and "MusnnafIbn Abu Shaybah" [8:  19], Part 2.
(3) See:  "Sharh AI-'Inayah Ma'a Fath Al-Qadir" [5: 192];  "Tabyin AL-Haqa 'iq" [4: 46]; "AL• Taj  Wa AL-Iklil" [4:  36];  "Fath AI-'Aziz Bi Hamish AL-Majmu"  [8:  127];  "Matalib  Uli AL-Nuha" [3:  25]; "AI-Qawa'id AI-Nuraniyyah, (P. 166); and  "Nazariyyat Al-'Aqd, (P.
224). See also Sheikh Siddiq Al-Darir: His valuable  book on  "Al-Gharar Wa Atharuhu
Fi AL-Uqud", Salih Kamil Lil-Rasail Al-Jami'iyyah, (P 54). (4) See: Dr. Hussein  Hamid:  "AI-Gharar", (P. 72).



1026





Shari'ah Stan dard No.  (41): Islami c Rein surance

and Prophetic Hadiths which instruct people to cooperate. In this regard, a number ofresolutions have been issued by the Islamic Research Academy of Al-Azhar in addition to the Resolution of the Islamic Fiqh Academy
-Makkah Al-Mukarramah and Resolution No. (9) 9/1  of the International Islamic Fiqh Academy which states: "Indeed, the contract which respects the origins ofIslamic dealings is the cooperative insurance contract which is based  on  donation  and  cooperation.."   Moreover, permissibility of cooperative insurance contract has never encountered dispute from any contemporary Fiqh scholar.6°
In addition  to what  has been  stated  above,  the  underlying  reasons for permissibility  of solidarity  reinsurance  and  impermissibility of commercial reinsurance  can be summarized  in the following essential differences between the two systems:
a) The commercial reinsurance company is an exchange-based financial contract which aims to make profit out of the reinsurance itself, and therefore should become subject to the rulings on exchange-based financial contracts which can be affected by Gharar. In the contrary, in  solidarity  reinsurance  the  contract  is based  on  donation  and cooperation and thus cannot be affected by Gharar when the contract involves it.
b) The company  in the Islamic reinsurance  contract  is an agent of the reinsurance  account, whereas in commercial  reinsurance  the company  is a principal  party who signs the contract  in his own name.
c) The  company  in  commercial  reinsurance  owns  the  reinsurance premiums against commitment to pay the reinsurance amount, while in Islamic reinsurance the company does not own the contributions, which are owned by the reinsurance account
d) In Islamic reinsurance the remaining part ofthe contributions and the returns on it -after expenses and compensations- go to the account of the policyholders (such amounts represent the surplus distributed among participants), whereas this cannot be imagined in commercial

(5) A Fatwa issued by the Shari'ah Board ofthe Al Rajhi Banking Company for Investment,
Fatwa No. (40).



1027





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance

reinsurance, because the contributions are owned by the company by virtue ofthe contract and through actual possession. The contributions in the case of commercial reinsurance are even considered as revenue and profit.
e) In Islamic reinsurance  the returns  earned  from investment  of the principal  amount  of the  contributions   go to  the  account  of the policyholder after deduction of the Mudaribs share by the company, whereas in commercial reinsurance such returns go to the company.
f) Islamic reinsurance aims to achieve cooperation among the participa• ting companies rather than profit, whereas commercial reinsurance aims to achieve profit from the reinsurance process itself.
g) In Islamic reinsurance  the company makes profits by investment of its funds in addition to its share in the Mudarabah, as it assumes the role of the Mudarib and the reinsurance account assumes the role of Rab al-Mal.
h) In Islamic reinsurance companies the participant and the reinsurance client are in fact the same person even iflegally considered as separate personalities, while in commercial reinsurance  companies they are completely different.
i) An Islamic reinsurance  company  observes the rules of the Islamic Shari'ah and the Fatwas issued by its Shari'ah Supervisory Board, whereas the case is not so for commercial reinsurance companies.
j) When the allocations deducted from the solidarity reinsurance fund remain unpaid until the time of liquidation they are spent on chari• table purposes and are not given to the participants, whereas in com• mercial reinsurance companies such funds go to participants.
■  The Islamic reinsurance  contract  is considered  as a binding  donation contract, because it is analogous to Munahadah (contribution of travelers to a pool of food victuals) or to pledge of donation. Both of the Islamic Fiqh Academy of the Muslim World League and the International Islamic Fiqh Academy stipulated in their resolutions referred to earlier that Islamic reinsurance is based on donation.



1028





Shari'ah Standard No. (41): Islamic Reinsurance

The fact that the Islamic reinsurance  contract  is binding  can also be derived from what has been emphasized by Imam Malik about donation. According to Imam Malik a gift in general becomes valid before possession, and this was also said to have been the viewpoint of Ali and Ibn Masood. The Hanbali scholars hold that a gift is binding even if it is not possessed, except in things that are measured in terms ofvolume and weight." Ibn Rushd (the grandson) said: "Scholars were in disagreement regarding possession...Malik said: "The contract is valid on acceptance, and possession ofthe gift should be enforced quite like the case in sale.."
Ali and Ibn Mas'ud are reported  to have said:  "Gift is permissible  if it is known, whether it is possessed  or not".  It is also reported  that Abu Bakar and  Omar  considered  the  gift to be binding  only when  it is possessed."" Therefore, Malik seems to have taken all these viewpoints into consideration. He derived from the viewpoint of Ali, Ibn Masood and the others that the contract as such is binding, whereas he took the viewpoint ofAbu Bakar and Omar to mean that possession is a necessary condition for completion of the contract so as to leave no room for the Dhar~'ah (excuse) mentioned by Umar.

The fact that a pledge ofdonation is binding can also be derived from the Hadith of the Prophet (peace be upon him) who said:  "The person who retreatsfrom a gift that he offers is like the dog which licks up its vomit".0
• The ruling that the company, which assumes the role ofthe agent in Islamic reinsurance, should not guarantee is based on the unanimous agreement among Fiqh scholars that an agent should not guarantee except in case of transgression, negligence or breach ofthe contract.
■  The necessity of mentioning the nine principles of Islamic reinsurance in the articles of association of the company stems from the need for reinfor• cing the donative nature of the contract and laying the Shari'ah foundation

(6) "Bidayat AL-Mujtahid" [2: 53]); "AL-Maughni" by Ibn Qudamah [5: 64]). See also:  "Bada'i' Al-Sana'i" [8: 3960]; and "Al-Ghayah AI-Quswa" [2: 655].
(7) "Bidayat AL-Mujtahid" [2: 534].
(8) See:  "AL-Muwatta" [2: 46]; and  "Nasb AL-Rayah" [4: 12]. (9) "Bidayat Al-Mujtahid" [2/53]).
(10)  "Sahih AL-Bukhart"  [5: 19]; and  "Sahih Muslim" (H:  1622).



1029





Shari'ah Standard No.  (41): Islami c Reinsurance

for this important  aspect of the company.  In the absence of emphasis on these principles which distinguish Islamic reinsurance from commercial reinsurance,  Islamic reinsurance may become an exchange-based reinsu• rance contract, and hence becomes vulnerable to nullification by Gharar, as has been indicated earlier. For illustration ofthese distinguishing principles of Islamic reinsurance, several Fatwas have been issued including:  Fatwa No.  (12/11)  issued by the 12 AI Baraka Seminar on Islamic Economics, and Fatwa No. (42/3) issued by the Shari'ah Supervisory Board of Al Rajhi Company, as well as the Fatwas of the Sharf'ah Supervisory Board of Faisal Islamic Bank, Islamic Insurance company -Jordan-"and Islamic Insurance Company of Qatar.
■    The basic elements and conditions  of the Islamic reinsurance  contract are derived from its nature as a contract which is binding to the two par• ties in addition to the special nature ofthe insurance contract with regard to the subject matter of insurance.
■  The reinsurer  and the client should honor  their commitments  because the reinsurance contract is binding to both parties. According to Sharf'ah, the two parties should honor  what they agree upon as long as it does not contradict with the rules and principles of Islamic Shari'ah. This can be derived from the Quranic Verses and Hadiths which instruct people to  observe  commitments   and  conditions  they  agree upon,  including the Verse: {"O you who believe! Fulfill (your) obligations}? and the Hadith of the Prophet  (peace be upon him) who said:  "Muslims  are at
their conditions".(3
■  The basis of the ruling that the reinsurance  company may assume the responsibility ofmanaging the reinsurance account against a fee or free of charge is the nature ofthe agency (Wakalah) contract which Fiqh scholars unanimously  declare as permissible with or without remuneration. This point  of view is supported  by the  12  AI Baraka Seminar on Islamic

(11) See:  "Fatawa Al-Ta  'min",  Dallah Al Baraka Group, reviewed by Dr. Abd Al-Sattar
Abu Guddah and Dr. Ezz Al-Din Mohammad Khojah, (pp. 99-108). (12) [A1-Ma' dah (The table):1].
(13) Related by Al-Bukhari  with dogmatizing  comments  from his side:  "Fath  Al-Bari" [4: 251]; "Al-Tirmidhi" - with "Tuhfat Al-Ahwazi" [4: 584] and he said a good and authentic Hadith.



1030





Shari'ah Standard No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance

Economics (Fatwa No.  12/11), the Islamic Fiqh Academy of the Muslim World League (Fatwa No. 961) and the Supreme Council ofUlama ofthe Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (Fatwa No. 51).
• Permissibility for the company to invest the funds of the reinsurance ac• count is based on the Mudarabah contract which Fiqh scholars unani• mously declare as permissible. Such contract entails prior specification of profit sharing ratios so that the reinsurance account can get its share ofthe profit as indicated by a number ofFatwas including: Fatwa ofthe Shari'ah Supervisory Board of Faisal Islamic Bank, Fatwa No.  12/11 of the 12
Seminar of Al Baraka and Shari'ah Standard No. (13) on Mudarabah.
• Necessity of observing conditions in general, including commitment  of the company to present Qard Hasan (benevolent loan) to the reinsurance account, is based on the commitment to honor pledges that are binding to only one party of the contract. Honoring such pledges is emphasized by a number  of distinguished  Fiqh scholars, and is well supported  by Shari'ah Texts and Traditions. One of these texts is the Verse: {"O you who believe! Fulfill (your) obligations"}, which is taken to mean any Shari'ah-acceptable commitment.  Several Hadiths  have also indicated enforceability of honoring  contracts, pledges and promises.    In this respect also Fiqh Academies and Shari'ah Supervisory Boards have issued resolutions including: Resolution No. (40-41) 2-3/50ofthe International Islamic Fiqh Academy, and the Fatwa of the Shari'ah Supervisory Board of the Islamic Insurance Company -Jordan.
■  The ruling that the participant should bear the burden ofproving, is based
on application ofthe general rules of evidence which state that evidence is to be provided by the alleger. This rule is supported by explicit indications from the Qur'an and the Sunnah and the viewpoints ofknowledgeable Fiqh scholars. A Fatwa in this regard has also been issued by the consolidated Shari'ah Supervisory Board ofAl Baraka (Fatwa No. 14/6).

(14) See: The Book titled "Al-Maudarabah Fi Kutub Al-Madhahib Al-Fiqhiyyah'; and "AL• Mawsuah Al-Kuwaytiyyah", the term Mudarabah.
(15) For more details see:  "Mabda' Al-Rida Fi AL-'Uqud", a comparative  study [2:  1161]
and its reliable references.
(16) See the Journal ofthe Academy, No. (5) 2/754-965. (17) "Fatawa Al-Ta 'min, (P. 106).



1031





Shari'ah Standard No.  (41): Islami c Reinsurance

■  The basis of permissibility of the two types of reinsurance is the various evidences  of permissibility of insurance  and  the  Fatwas  issued  by the
2 Seminar  of Al Baraka (Fatwa No.  2/9), the  10 Seminar  of Al Baraka (Fatwa No.  10/3/5), and the Fatwas of the Sharf'ah Supervisory  Boards of Dubai  Islamic Bank, Faisal Islamic Bank, Kuwait Finance  House, Qatar Islamic Bank and the Islamic Insurance  Company.
■  The basis of the rulings relating to the Islamic insurance  and reinsurance contract is the general principles  of contracts in the Islamic Shari'ah such as forbiddance  of cheating  and  fraud,  and  necessity of commitment to the time  specified for implementation of contracts. In addition  to these general  principles,  the  insurance   and  reinsurance   contracts   are  also based on specific  rulings pertaining  to insurance  coverage indicated  by the  Resolutions  and  Fatwas issued by the  Islamic Fiqh Academy of the Muslim World League, the Supreme Council  of Ulema and the Sharf'ah Supervisory  Boards of Islamic banks and Islamic insurance companies.(9
■  The jurisdictions of the company  are based on its articles of association, the  documents which  regulate  the  contract, the  general  principles  of contracts and conditions,  insurance  practices  and the Fatwas issued by Sharf'ah Supervisory Boards.
■  The  rulings  that  relate  to  regulation   of the  relationship  between  the
company and the policyholders are based on the articles of association of the company which specify whether the contract is a fee-based agency or not, in addition to the Mudarabah contract regarding the reinsurance fund
■  The  reinsurance   coverage  is based  on  the  general  texts  affirming  the Hadith which states:  "No harm and no reciprocal harm"" and the general rules and principles  of Islamic Fiqh which stipulate that coverage should be for the actual harms  and not at all for making  a wealth out of it. The reinsurance  coverage is also governed by the donative nature ofthe Islamic reinsurance  contract  and the Fatwas issued by competent  bodies such as

(18) "Fatawa Al-Ta 'min", (pp. 193 -206). (19) 1bid.
(20) Ibid.
(21) This is a Hadith  narrated by Malik in  "AL-Muwatta, Kitab Al-Aqdiyah,  (P. 464);
"Musnad Ahmad"  [1: 313 and 5: 527]; and Ibn Majah in his "Hashiyah [2: 784].



1032





Shari'ah Standard No. (41): Islamic Reinsurance

Fatwa No. (3) ofthe 10 Seminar ofAl Baraka and the Fatwas issued by the
Shari'ah Supervisory Boards ofIslamic banks and insurance companies.(
■  The reinsurance  surplus is based on the nature  of the donation-based contract and what has been reported by Al-Bukhari about the practice of the Sahabah (companions ofthe Prophet, peace be upon him) in the case of Munahadah.03
■  Permissibility of reinsurance  with traditional  reinsurance  companies is based on the practical necessity arising from lack for Islamic reinsurance coverage and the dire public need which ranks up as necessity. Shari'ah recognition for necessity and dire public need is supported by a number of Texts in the Qur'an and the Sunnah. In this respect also a Fatwa has been issued by Faisal Islamic Bank of Sudan (Fatwa No. 5/3).
























(22) "Fatawa AI-Ta 'min", (P. 153).
(23) Al-Bukhari stated in his "Sahih" with "Fath Al-Bari" [5:  12]), Bab Al-Sharikah Fi AL• Tatim Wa Al-Nihd Wa Al-'Urud ...because Muslims did not see any harm in Nihd, of which each ofthem used to eat a part, and he mentioned some Hadiths indicating what he had stated. In his Book "Fath AL-Bari" [5:  129], Ibn Hajar said: "Nihd is a practice in which all the people in companionship (on travel) provide the food Each of them contributes the same quantity, yet some may consume more than others, even though, the remaining food is shared among them if they do not decide to keep it for another journey': This is exactly the reinsurance surplus, or quite similar to it.



1033





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Reinsurance

The reinsurance contract is a contract according to which the insurance company transfers part of the risks of its insurance commitments to the reinsurance  company. The insurance company, therefore, undertakes  to pay to the reinsurance company part of the insurance premium paid by the participants, against commitment of the reinsurance company to bear part of the claims as per an agreement between the two parties. Islamic reinsurance has the distinctive characteristic of being based on the same principles of solidarity insurance, as indicated in Shari'ah Standard No. (26) on Islamic Insurance.

Special Need

Something that concerns a certain group of people, or the employees of a certain  profession, as for instance the  need for insurance  for the employees in trade and industry sectors.

Public Need
Something that does not concern a certain group ofpeople, or a certain country. Public need is the need that concerns everybody such as the need for Istisna'a.

Reinsurance Commission

A percentage amount of the contributions payable to the reinsurance company, paid to the Islamic insurance company for the efforts it exerts in mobilizing the reinsured insurance contracts.

Reinsurance Profit Commission

A percentage amount ofthe realized increase ofrevenues over expenses in the reinsurance agreement,  paid to the Islamic insurance company as



1034





Shari'ah Standard No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance

a bonus for its excellent performance in managing the insurance operations in general, and the reinsured risks in particular.

Risk-Sharing Reinsurance
The process of sharing the insured risk between the Islamic insurance company and other insurance companies, either due to lack of sufficient insurance capacity for such risk, or because of regulatory requirements  of risk sharing with regard to the magnitude of the risk in question.

Financial  Gains of Islamic Insurance  Companies  from Traditional
Reinsurance Companies

Reinsurance  agreements  between  traditional  reinsurance  companies and Islamic insurance  companies lead to the following financial gains to Islamic insurance companies:
■  Compensations for harms; the reinsurance company bears a percen• tage ofthe risk cover -when the harm materializes- commensurate to the percentage of its share from insurance contributions.
■  Reinsurance commission; which is a percentage amount ofthe contribu• tions payable to the reinsurance company, paid to the Islamic insurance company for the efforts it exerts in mobilizing the reinsured insurance contracts.
■  Reinsuranceprofitcommission;whichreferstoapercentageamountofthe
realizedincreaseofrevenues (reinsurancecontributions) overexpensesinthe reinsurance agreement (coverage), paidto the Islamic insurance company as a bonus for its excellent performance in managing the insurance ope• rations in general and the reinsured risks in particular, and providing the best services to its customers. Such amount is paid in the form of an agreed upon percentage of the profits of the reinsurance company, as per the reinsurance agreement signed between the two companies. When  the reinsurance  company  earns profits  from the reinsurance contracts signed between the two companies, the reinsurance company pays the part of the profits agreed upon to the insurance company.







1035





Shari'ah Standard  No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance





Appendix (D)
A Model Reinsurance Agreement Issued by Islamic Insurance Company - Jordan


1. The insurance  company agrees with the reinsurance  company on signing annual  agreements with the aim of transferring part  of the risk borne by the insurance  company, to the reinsurance company.

2. The insurance  company assumes beforehand commitment to transfer to the reinsurer the agreed upon part ofthe reinsured risk, and the reinsurer offers  his  acceptance. According  to the  conditions  of the  reinsurance agreements, the  commitment of the reinsurer  becomes  valid  since the time of signing the original insurance  contract with the insurance  client

3. The insurance company assumes the commitment to pay the reinsurance contribution  against the commitment of the reinsurer  to pay its share of the claims, in addition to the commissions agreed upon  for the contracts within  the signed agreements.  It can also be stipulated in the agreement that the insurance company shall obtain a share in the profits achieved by the reinsurer under the signed agreements.

4. The insurance company retains a percentage of the reinsurance contribu• tions (40%) for fire agreements, general accidents and marine and health insurance, as a guarantee for honoring  commitments  from the side of the reinsurer. The amount thus retained is to be released after one year within the reinsurance agreement. During the period of its retention, the amount is to be invested with the Islamic Bank of Jordan through  Sharf'ah-accept• able modes of investment, and the reinsurer be given the part ofthe return agreed upon.

5. The return  thus obtained by the reinsurer  becomes part of his accounts, and is deductable from the commissions to be received from him, on the



1036





Shari'ah Standard No.  (41): Islamic Reinsurance

basis of the fact that such amount  is part  of the cost of the reinsurance operation.

6. The reinsurer assumes the commitment to pay commission to the insurance company.  Such commission  is determined as a certain percentage of the reinsurance contributions. This amount does not represent a commission in the strict sense of the word. It is rather a contribution  from the part of the reinsurer in the direct expenses borne by the insurance company, and which relate to the reinsured risks.

7. Such commissions enter  into  the  accounts  of policyholders as part  of revenues in the account  of the cooperative insurance fund.

8. The reinsurance  agreement normally stipulates the right of the insurance company to obtain a specific percentage of the net profits achieved by the reinsurer under the reinsurance  agreement

9. Reinsurance  profit commission  is calculated at the end of the agreement period, and enters into the accounts of the policyholders as part of reve• nues.





























1037























Shari'ah Standard No. (42)



Financial Rights and How They
Are Exercised and Transferred












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                           1043
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................      1044

1. Scope of the Standard..............................................................................      1044
2. Definition of Financial Rights.................................................................      1044
3. Types of Financial Rights                                                                       1044
4. Rights Resulting from Ownership..........................................................      1046
5. Easements..................................................................................................      1046
6. Financial Rights Arising from Neighbourhood                                    1046
7. Right of Shuf'ah (Preemption)................................................................      1047
8. Right of Occupancy..................................................................................      1048
9. Right ofTahjir.........................................................................................        1049
10. Transfer of Rights for Consideration......................................................      1049
11. How Rights Are Exercised and Transferred                                             1050
12. Protection ofRights..................................................................................      1050
13. Some Rules Governing Contemporary Applications of the Transfer
and Exercise of Financial Rights.............................................................      1051
14. Date of Issuance ofthe Standard.............................................................      1051
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1052
Appendices
Appendix (a):  BriefHistory ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1053
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard....................................       1054
Appendix (c):  Definitions.............................................................................       1058










1041








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to describe the rules relating to financial rights, how they are exercised and transferred  and the mechanisms used to protect them as well as to highlight certain rights exercised in the transactions of Islamic financial institutions.co
































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



1043





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard provides a description of financial rights, their types, rules, conditions, parameters, the way they are exercised and transferred and the mechanisms used to protect them. It also addresses the most important rights exercised in the transactions of financial institutions.

This Standard does not cover non-financial rights; Khiyarat (options to terminate  a contract); e.g., Khiyar al-Shart (an option stipulated by the parties giving one or both ofthem the right to revoke the contract within a specified period  of time) and Khiyar al-Naqd (an option giving the seller the right to revoke the contract for non-payment within a specified time etc.); or rights relating to Waqf (endowments), as they have already been covered in separate standards.

2. Definition of Financial Rights

A financial right is the prerogative of a (natural or artificial) person recognized by the Sharf'ah to have rights and responsibilities and the legal capacity to enter into transactions.

3. Types of Financial Rights

Financial rights are ofthree types:

3/1 Personal rights (rights in personam): These are rights arising from the liability of another person, such as debts payable by a debtor.

3/2 Proprietary rights (rights in rem): These are rights attached to specific property  conferring  to the owner direct authority over it without interference from another person, whether such rights are primary or secondary.

3/2/1 Primary proprietary rights, such as rights arising from full and complete ownership,  are independent  rights that do not rely on the existence of any other right.



1044





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

3/2/2 Secondary proprietary rights; these are proprietary rights that have no purpose  of their own except to protect  the fulfillment of personal  rights, such as the rights  of a creditor  in security provided  by an obligor.

3/2/3 The distinction between proprietary and personal  rights: The owner of a proprietary right is able to directly enforce his right to  specific property using  permissible means.  The  owner  of a personal  right, on the other hand, cannot enforce his right by claiming any specific property.

3/3  Rights to intangible  assets:

3/3/1 These  are financial  rights  to  intangible  assets, whereby  the owner  is exclusively entitled  to their  output.

3/3/2 Types of rights to intangible assets: Rights to intangible assets are ofmany kinds, including rights to trade name, trading addresses, trademarks, commercial licenses; intellectual property, technical and industrial know-how, patents and copyrights.

3/3/3  Rules governing  rights to intangible  assets:

3/3/3/1 Rights to trade names, trading  addresses, trademarks, copyrights, inventions and patents are the rights of their respective owners. These possess recognised monetary value in contemporary business and commercial custom. Since these rights are recognised and protected by the Sharf'ah, it is not permissible to violate them.

3/3/3/2 Since rights  to intangible  assets are recognised  as fi• nancial rights, it is permissible to dispose of or transfer them for consideration  provided that such transactions are free of Gharar (ambiguity), deception and fraud.

3/3/3/3 Commercial license: A commercial license is a right given by the relevant authority to certain businesses to engage in specified  activities. It is permissible for the license holder to dispose of it for or without  consider• ation unless specifically prohibited by law.



1045





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

3/4 Financial rights can be acquired by contract, stipulated conditions, inheritance  or court order. Financial rights may be established by long-standing continuous use without objection or first use subject to fulfillment of all the Shari'ah conditions required for the acquisition of such rights.

4. Rights Resulting from Ownership

4/1 Ownership ofan asset or usufruct gives the owner the right ofcomplete disposition, either by a complete transfer or the transfer of usufruct only, for or without consideration, except what is prohibited by the Sharf'ah.

4/2 Ownership of usufruct entitles the owner to use it (whether directly or indirectly through  another  person)  subject to compliance with the terms stipulated by the owner of the asset and bearing liability for the asset in case ofmisuse, negligence or breach of condition.

4/3 Ownership of a license to use gives the licensee the right to personal use only which cannot be transferred to a third party.

5. Easements

5/1 Private easements are established rights attached to one real estate property over another, such as irrigation rights, watercourse rights, drainage rights and rights of passage.

5/2  Public easements are the rights of the general public to benefit from public utilities provided by the state and similar entities.

5/2/1 The right of an individual to a public easement is restricted to personal use only.

6. Financial Rights Arising from Neighbourhood

6/1 The rights of neighbourhood based on the ownership  of different floors of a building prohibit each owner to act in a manner that will definitely or most likely cause harm to others.

6/2 Since the owners of different  floors of a building  co-ownership in the underlying land, the following apply:



1046





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

6/2/1  If a lower storey collapses due to any fault of its owner, he is liable to reconstruct it so that the owners of the upper-storeys are not harmed.

6/2/2 If the owner of the lower storey is not  responsible for the collapse, the courts have decisive authority to settle the matter in the best interests of both parties and to avert harm from them.

6/2/3 The owners have the right to enjoy use of common facilities and services.

7. Right of Shufah  (Preemption)

7/1  Definition  of Shuf'a  (preemption):  Shuf'a  is the  right  given to a neighbour  or co-owner of real estate property to acquire a sold property from its buyer with or without their consent for the price at which it was sold.

7/1/1 The right ofShuf'ah exists only in relation to immovable prop•
erty or movable property attached to it.

7/1/2 The right ofShuf'ah enjoyed by a neighbour is applicable only when the two properties share common easement rights.

7/2 Rules of Shufa'h

7/2/1 The Shafi' (preemptor) takes the place ofthe buyer and, subject to circumstances being equal,  enjoys  the right to purchase the property on the same terms as contracted with the buyer, such as deferred payment. The Shafi' (preemptor) assumes all also the liabilities ofthe buyer such as the usual conveyancing costs.

7/2/2 If in a jointly owned property, there are more than one Shu•
fa'a' (preemptors), each has the right of Shuf'ah proportionate to his share in the property.

7/2/3 Rights of Shuf'a are not extinguished upon the death of the
Shafi' (preemptor) but are inherited by his heirs.



1047





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

7/2/4 Rights of Shufah must be claimed immediately upon becoming aware of the sale in accordance with custom or law, failing which they lapse.

7/2/5 The Shafi' (preemptor) is entitled to invalidate all the dispositions of the preempted property  that were made prior to the exercise of the right of Shuf'ah, even ifit has changed hands.

7/2/6  There is no right ofShuf'ah where ownership is transferred without a sale or a transaction having the effect of a sale. Therefore, there is no right of Shuf'ah where transfer is effected by inheritance, bequest or gift without consideration.
8. Right of Occupancy

Occupancy is a right based on the right ofthe tenant to retain his tenancy in property or commercial  unit.

Occupancy  has a number  of forms:

8/1  The  Shari'ah  does not prohibit  the owner  and the tenant  agreeing that  the tenant  will pay a lump  sum  of money  over and above the periodic rental amount,  on condition  that it is considered part of the agreed rent for the entire lease period. If the lease is terminated early, the rules applicable to rental payments  apply to this amount.

8/2  It is permitted by the Shari'ah for the owner and the tenant to agree during  the lease period  that  the  owner will pay an amount to the tenant  in  exchange  of the  tenant  waiving his  contractual   right  to the ownership  of the usufruct  for the remaining  period  on the basis that  such payment  compensates  the  tenant  for waiver of his right to the usufruct that  he purchased  from the owner.  However,  if the lease period expires and the contract is not renewed, either expressly or by operation  of a provision  for automatic  renewal, then  it is not permitted to take payment for vacating the premises, and the owner has the right to take back his property after expiry of the term.

8/3  The Shari'ah permits an agreement between the incumbent tenant and a new tenant during the lease period to assign the lease for an amount exceeding the regular rental amount  for release of occupancy subject to the requirements  of the terms and conditions of the original lease



1048





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

contract and applicable laws that are compliant with the rules of the
Shari'ah.

In  long-term  lease  contracts,  contrary  to  contractual   terms that are based  on what is permitted by the laws of some jurisdictions, the Sharf'ah does not permit  the tenant  to sub-lease  or assign the property  to another  tenant  in return  for payment  except with  the agreement of the owner.
If the incumbent tenant  agrees to hand  over occupancy  to a new tenant after the end of the lease period, the Shari'ah does not permit him to take any payment  because the right of the incumbent tenant in the usufruct has expired.

9. Right ofTahjir

9/1  Tahjir means taking possession of a piece ofland  and marking it with certain recognised markers with the permission  of the government.

9/2 Tahjir results in exclusivity and priority over others, but it does not on its own confer ownership.

9/3 A person who has carried out Tahjir on a piece ofland is permitted to waive his entitlement  in favour of another person for consideration, but he is not allowed to sell the land as he does not yet own it.
9/4 The right of Tahjir expires if the land is not utilised for three years, or as provided by applicable regulations.

10. Transfer of Rights for Consideration

10/ 1   It is not permissible to take consideration for transfer ofput or call option rights, whether by means of sale or otherwise.

10/2 It is not permissible to take consideration  for transfer or waiver of rights granted  only to prevent harm,  such as the right of Shuf'ah (preemption).

10/3 It is permissible  to take consideration for transfer  or waiver of easement  rights, by means of sale or otherwise.

10/4  It is permissible  to sell rights to use and rights arising from first use.



1049





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

11. How Rights Are Exercised and Transferred

11/1  AII financial rights are in principle disposable, and the owner of a financial right has the absolute right to exercise and transfer his right in accordance with the rules and principles of the Sharf'ah and in particular, the following:

11/1/1 Rights should not be exercised in a manner abuse to others.

11/ 1/2 The public interest is given priority when it conflicts with the exercise of a private property right.

11/2 Subject to the provisions ofthis Standard, the constructive methods of disposal of rights include all types of contracts  of exchange, donations, waivers, partnerships, and assignments of rights.  [see Standard No. (7) on Hawalah]

12. Protection  of Rights

12/1 Rights are to be protected from any violation.

12/2  In addition  to the provisions  of Shari'ah  Standard  No.  (5) on
Guarantees, the methods ofprotecting financial rights include:

a) Rights do not extinguished by passage of time but there can be a limitation period after which a claim cannot be made in court.

b) Right of lien:  A creditor has the right to retain the debtor's property  already in his possession until he receives payment of the due debt from the debtor. This may take several forms:
I. The right of the seller to retain the sold item until he receives the due price.
II.The right of a manufacturer or worker to retain the product of their work until they receive the payment due.
III. The right of the lessor to retain the lessee's property inside the leased asset until he receives the rent due, because the lessor has possession of the leased asset which contains the lessee's property.
IV. The right of a courier to retain the dispatched property until he receives his fees.



1050





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

V.  The  right  of a bailee to  retain  the bailed  property until  he receives his fee.
VI. The right of an agent to retain the property of the principal until he receives his agency fee.

c) If the  buyer  of an item  becomes  insolvent  and  the  seller finds that specific item in the insolvency assets, the seller has a priority proprietary right to it ifthe applicable regulations ofa jurisdiction allow it. Refer to Shari'ah Standard No. (43) on Insolvency.

13. Some Rules Governing  Contemporary  Applications  of the Transfer and Exercise of Financial Rights

13/1  It is permitted for corporate  bylaws to give existing shareholders priority over third  parties to subscribe  for shares upon  a decision to increase the company's share capital. Each shareholder is entitled to subscribe in proportion to his respective share prior to the share issuance.

13/2  It is permissible to assign a right ofpriority referred to in item 13/ 1 to a third party without  consideration, subject to the provisions  of the law and the rules of company supervisory bodies.

14. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 4 Dhul-Qa'dah 1430 A.H., corresponding to 23 October  2009 A.D.




















1051





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board has adopted the Standard on Financial Rights and How they are Exercised and Transferred in its meeting No. (25) held during the period of 2-4 Dhul-Qadah 1430 A.H., corresponding to 21-23 October
2009A.D.











































1052





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On  13 Shawwal  1425  A.H., corresponding to 25 November  2004 A.D., the  General  Secretariat  decided  to  commission   a Shari'ah consultant to prepare  a juristic  study  on Financial  Rights and  How They Are Exercised and Transferred.

In its meeting held on 4 Sha'ban 1426 A.H., corresponding to 8 September
2005 A.D., the Sharf'ah Standards Committee  discussed the draft of a Sharf'ah Standard on on Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred and made necessary amendments.

The revised draft of the Shari'ah  Standard was presented  to the Sharf'ah Board in its meeting No. (16) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, during the period of 7-12 Jumada I, 1427 A.H., corresponding to 3-9 June 2006 A.D. It became clear that the issue needed further  study to deal with some Shari'ah aspects.

The General  Secretariat commissioned a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Financial  Rights and Their Disposition (to be presented) on 14 Jumada II, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 7 June 2009 A.D.

The  General  Secretariat  held  a public  hearing,  and  all the  comments made in the public hearing were listened to, and the members ofthe Shari'ah Board answered these comments and made commentary on them.

In its meeting  No. (25) held in Bahrain  during  the period  of 2-4 Dhul• Qadah 1430 A.H., corresponding to 21-23 October  2009 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board  discussed  the  draft  of the  Standard,  incorporated the  necessary amendments that it deemed  appropriate, and adopted the Standard.



1053





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


The basis for the recognition of financial  rights  is recognised  jurispru• dential evidences from the Qur 'an, Sunnah, Ijma' and Qiyas that indicate the right of ownership.
■  The basis for the rules governing rights to intangible assets is the Resolution of the  International  Islamic Fiqh Academy No. (43)  5/5 affirming, from established proofs, their existence and the rules governing them, which are the basis for the resolution.
■  The  basis for the  distinction  between  proprietary rights and  personal rights is the view of contemporary jurists that Islamic jurisprudence has recognised this distinction in all matters that require such distinction.0
■  The basis for the recognition  of rights, whether  to tangible or intangible assets is the saying of the Prophet  (peace be upon him): "No harm and no reciprocal harm"•3
■  The basis for the right of Shuf'a enjoyed by a partner  or a neighbour  is the practice of the Prophet  (peace be upon him). Jabir Ibn Abdullah  (may Al• lah be pleased with him) narrated:  "Allah's Messenger  (peace be upon him) ruled in favor ofthe right ofShufah so long as the property is not divided". Abu Salamah Ibn Abdul-Rahman  narrated:  "The Prophet (peace be upon him) ruled in favor of the right ofShufah in property that has not been di•
vided among the partners. If boundaries have been assigned between them and the paths have been demarcated,  then there is no right ofShufah.° In
the narration  related by Muslim:  "The Prophet (peace be upon him) ruled in favor of the right ofShufah in any undivided co-ownership, whether in a

(2) See Mustafa Al-Zarqa:  "Al-Madkhal Ila Nazariyyat AL-Iltizam".
(3) The Hadith has  been related  by Malik  in  "Al-Muwatta "' (P. 464); "Musnad Ahmad"
[1:313], and  "Sunan Ibn Majah" [2: 784]. (4) "Sahih AL-Bukhari", (H: 2257).
(5) "AI-Muwatta", (H:  1420).



1054





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

piece ofland or an orchard. A co-owner is not allowed to sell his share unless permitted by the other co-owners. Ifthe co-owner wants, he can buy it. Ifhe wants, he can leave it. But ifone co-owner sells it without permission ofthe
other co-owners,  then they have a greater right to it.9 Qatadah narrated that the Prophet (peace be upon him) said:  "The neighbour of the house has a greater right to the house".(7)  These two Hadiths are reconciled by ascribing the last Hadith to a neighbour who is also a co-owner or shares easement rights.
■  The basis for the right to a share of water is Allah's Statement in the Qur'an:  {"Here is a she-camel: It has a right to drink (water), and you have a right to drink (water),  (each) on a day, known}." There is also Allah's Statement in the Qur'an: ''And inform them that the water is to
be shared between them. Each one should drink in turn. In Shari'ah, it
means a turn to utilise water for land or trees or crops. Related Shari'ah terms are the right of Shirb, which is specifically for watering crops and trees; the right of Shafah, which is specifically the right of humans and animals to drink as well as using water for purposes like ablution, bathing, etc.GThere is a special set of rules for water in the Shari'ah based upon the statement of the Prophet (peace be upon him): "People share in three things: water, pasturage andfire"•
■  The basis for the right of Tahjir and the rights established by first use is the Sunnah.  Ibn Qudamah  states:  ''Anyone who carries out Tahjir of previously unappropriated land and begins to make it productive but did not complete it, he is more entitled to it than others, based upon the sta• tement of the Prophet (peace be upon him):  'Jtnyone who first uses what no other Muslim haspreviously used is more entitled to it". Ifhe transfers it to someone else, then the second person is more entitled to it than others because the first owner of the right has granted it to him. If the owner of the right dies, it transfers to his heirs, based on the statement of the

(6) "Sahih Muslim" (H: 1608).
(7) "Sahih al-Bukhari" with "Fath AI-Bart" [12: 345]. (8) [AI-Shu'ara  (The Poets):  155).
(9) [Al-Qamar (The Moon): 28].
(10) AI-Kasani, "Bada 'i' AI-Sana'r" [6: 188-192]. (11)  "Musnad Ahmad"  [5: 364].



1055





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

Prophet  (peace be upon him):  "The heirs ofa deceased person inherit his estate". However, it is not permitted for the owner of a right  of Tahjir to sell it because his entitlement is confined to his personal  use like the right
of Shuf'ah (preemption).  [An alternative  view is that] its sale could be considered  valid because he is more  entitled  to it.2 Al-Mardawi  states: "Anyone carrying out Tahjir over previously unappropriated land will not own it...but he is more entitled to it than  others, as well as his heirs after him and whomever he transfers  it to, without  any dispute. However, he cannot  sell it, and this is the position  of our School. It has also been said that he may sell it. Abu Khattab mentioned it as a possibility, and he refer• red to its permissibility as the correct position  without  any qualification
in "Al-Muharrar",  "AI-Riayatayn" and "AI-Hawi Al-Saghir".3
■  The basis for the prohibition of abusive  exercise of rights  is deduction from the Qur'an and Sunnah. There are many Verses in the Qur 'an which indicate the obligation  of justice, fairness  and refraining  from exercising
one's rights in a way that harms others. Allah commands: {"Showforgive•
ness, enjoin what is good, and turn awayfrom thefoolish}     As for the
Sunnah, we find the following Hadith:  "May Allah bless the person who is lenient in selling and buying and when demanding his right".
■  The basis for the invalidity of a condition stipulating that the seller retains ownership  in a sale contract  is that  the transfer  of ownership  is a legal effect of the sale contract. Therefore, it is not permissible  for a sale to take place without  it. This has also been  stressed  in Resolution  No.  (51) 6/2 of the International Islamic Fiqh Academy held in Jeddah, which  states: "The seller is not entitled  to retain ownership  of the sold item after the sale, but it is permissible  for him to stipulate a condition  on the buyer to retain possession  of the item as security against deferred  installments.
■  The basis for the right of retention is the Qur 'an and Sunnah. As for the Qur 'an, it is stated by Allah:  "And ifyou punish, then punish them with the like ofthat with which you were afflected. But ifyou endure patient•

(12) 1bn Qudamah, "AL-Kaft" [2: 394].
(13) AI-Mardawi, "AI-Insaf" [6: 373 and 374]. (14) [AI-A'raf (The Heights):199].



1056





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

ly, verily, it is better for those who are patient.US The Glorious Verse indicates the permissibility of reciprocal treatment.  Based on this,  it is permissible for a person to retain his property unless he receives his own rights from others. As for the Sunnah, it was narrated that the Prophet (peace be upon him)  said:  "The best amongst you is the one who is best in settlement of his obligations".(9
■  The basis for the impermissibility  of taking consideration  for sale or transfer ofput or call options is Resolution No. (63) 7I I ofthe Internatio• nal Islamic Fiqh Academy, which is based on recognised evidences.
■  The basis for the impermissibility ofselling the abstract rights mentioned
in item IO is the lack of monetary value [according to Shari'ah] as well as the presence of Gharar (uncertainty)and Jahalah (ambiguity).

































(15)  [AI-Nahal (The Bees):  126].
(16)  "Sunan Al-Nasai", printed  with Suyuti's Commentary, (P 318).



1057





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Right of Easement

It is the established right over one piece of real estate for the benefit of another piece of real estate.

Right oflrrigation (Shirb)

Shirb literally means a share in water. The Shari'ah definition is a turn to irrigate land or trees or crops.

Right of Watercourse (Majra)

It is the right of an owner of land distant from a watercourse to bring it via the property of his neighbour to his land to irrigate it.

Right of Drainage  (Masil)

It is the right of a person to get rid of excess water in his property via the property of another person. Watercourse is different from drainage in that watercourse is in order to bring water whereas drainage is to get rid of water not needed for the land.

Right of Way Easement  (Murur)

It is the right of the owner of an interior piece of land (land surrounded by other persons' lands) to access his land by means ofa road/path. It makes no difference if the road/path is public, not owned by anyone, or is privately owned by someone.

Right of Ascendancy  (Ta'alli)

The right of ascendancy means one person's right to have his structure be physically located above the structure of another person. This happens in multi- storey buildings in which one person owns a unit in a lower storey and another owns a unit in the storey above it.



1058





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

Preemption

Preemption in the terminology of jurists means the entitlement of the partner to buy what his partner has sold for the price at which he sold it.

Intangible Rights

Intangible right is the authority of a person over something that is ab• stract, e.g., ideas and inventions. The International Islamic Fiqh Academy, headquartered in Jeddah, issued its Resolution No. (43) 5/5 on the subject ofintangible rights, which include; Trade Name, Title, Trademark, Author• ship, and Invention. The Academy considered these to be rights particular to their respective owners which have established financial value. Conse• quently, these rights are recognized by the Shari'ah and they should not be violated.

Right of Utilization (Intifa')

The right of utilization is a juridical concept that refers to a person's temporary right over the asset ofanother person, who authorizes him to use it, exploit it, and dispose of its usufruct, but not the asset itself, during the period of utilization. The majority ofjurists, including the Shaff'is, Malikis and Hanbalis, distinguish between the ownership of usufruct  (Manfa'ah) and ownership of utilization  (Intifa'). Granting ownership of utilization (Intifa')  only allows  a person  to  directly  utilise  [the  asset].  Granting ownership of usufruct (Manfa'ah) is more general and comprehensive; it allows its owner to use the asset himself or to enable others to use it, either for compensation, as in a lease, or without compensation, as in gratuitous lending ofthe asset.

Right of Exclusive Lease (Hikar)

Hikar is the right to lease the land of an endowment for a long period of time.  The Mustahkir  (exclusive lessee) makes an advance payment to the endowment  which is nearly equal to the price of the land that is used to develop it or for the maintenance  of its premises. Another, insignificant, amount is arranged to be paid annually to the endowment by the Mustahkir  (exclusive lessee) or by whosoever this right has been transferred to.



1059





Shari'ah Standard No (42): Financial Rights and How They Are Exercised and Transferred

Right of Priority in Subscribing to an Increase in a Company's  Capital

It is the stipulation that the existing shareholders will have the right of priority in subscribing to an increase in the company's capital by purchasing shares at their nominal value

Vacating Houses or Shops

It refers to the right to stay in a house or shop.

Business License

It is a right granted by the authorities to some traders to deal in specific activities.

Right of Demarcation

It means  taking possession  of a piece of land  and  marking  it with markers  or a wall. Demarcation confers  privilege  and precedence  over others. It means that whosoever dernarks land is more entitled to develop it; however, it does not confer ownership.

Disposal

Disposal is the competence approved by the Sharf'ah, or custom, or law that enables the owner ofrights to dispose ofthem. This disposal can either be by transferring his right to others for recompense; e.g., sale or barter, or without recompense; e.g., gift, will, or by relinquishment.

Abusive Use of a Right

It the use ofa right in such a way that it is likely to cause serious extraor•
dinary harm to another.

Expiry

It is the lapse ofa right due to the passage oftime. However, in the Shari'h, rights do not lapse due to the mere passage of time.












1060

























Shari'ah Standard No.  (43)



Insolvency












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                           1065
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................      1066

1. Scope of the Standard..............................................................................      1066
2. Definitions of Insolvency and the Declaration of Insolvency.............      1066
3. Shari'ah Ruling on Insolvency................................................................      1066
4. Stages of Insolvency                                                                                1066
5. Consequences of Insolvency...................................................................      1068
6. Right of Claw-Back of an Item Sold to the Debtor Prior to the Dec•
laration of Insolvency (the Right of Claw-Back)..................................      1069
7. Sale ofthe Sequestered Assets and Allowances Made for the Insolvent
Debtor........................................................................................................      1070
8. Distribution  of the Insolvent Debtor's Assets Among the Creditors.      1070
9. Rules Specific to Institutions...................................................................      1071
10. Revoking the Declaration of Insolvency................................................      1072
11. Date of the Issuance of the Standard......................................................      1073
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1074
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1075
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard..............................            1077
Appendix (c):  Definitions.......................................................................            1081














1063








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to describe the rules ofinsolvency and the circumstances that  precede  it, whether  they  are faced by the  institutions,  companies  or individuals, both businessmen and non-businessmen,  with whom financial institutions" deal.































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



1065





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This  Standard  covers the  Shari'ah  rules  relating  to  the  causes and consequences  of insolvency, whether  faced by an institution  or its institutional or individual business and non-business customers. It also addresses the judicial declaration of insolvency over an institution  and its consequences, and in particular, the sale ofits assets, the distribution of the proceeds among the creditors and how insolvency is revoked.

It does not cover financial difficulties (as defined by Islamic jurisprudence), liquidity shortfalls or delays in payment that do not lead to a declaration of insolvency.

2. Definitions of Insolvency and the Declaration of Insolvency
Insolvency (Iflas): When the debt due of a person exceeds his assets. Declaration of insolvency (Taflees): A judge's declaration that a debtor is
insolvent, preventing him from disposing of his assets.

3. Shari'ah Ruling on Insolvency

3/1 A person whose debts exceed his assets has a moral obligation in Shari'ah to refrain from any action that may harm the creditors, even if he has not been declared insolvent.

3/2  The competent authorities should declare a person insolvent when his debts exceed his assets and sequester his assets ifhis creditors demand it, subject to the conditions mentioned in item 4/3.

3/3 When  a debtor  is declared  insolvent, the  declaration  must  be documented and certified as required by official procedures.

4. Stages of Insolvency

4/1  First stage: The creditors make a demand  upon the debtor to pay the debt due to the creditors pro-rata and to refrain from making



1066





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency

donations,  providing  loans  or  disposing  of or  acquiring  assets preferentially. The creditors can seek the assistance of concerned authorities in this regard.

4/2 Second stage: Ifthe debtor refuses to pay what he owes to the creditors, the creditors are entitled to file a claim against him as a step towards seeking a declaration of insolvency. They can petition the competent authorities to seek to:

4/2/1  Prevent the debtor from making donations;

4/2/2  Prevent the debtor from providing loans;

4/2/3  Prevent the  debtor from giving preferential treatment  (for example to certain creditors or in the disposal or acquisition of assets);

4/2/4  Prevent the debtor from admitting financial liability to those who may be the subject of preferential treatment such as his blood  relatives connected by up to four vertical steps (for example, a first cousin, who is connected vertically via the grandparents); and such as affiliates, subsidiaries and group entities of institutions;

4/2/5  Prevent the debtor from pre-paying debts that are not yet due;

4/2/6  Prevent the  debtor  from  transferring  any of his assets to some of the creditors or selling to or purchasing from them preferentially; and

4/2/7  Prevent the debtor from travel that causes harm to the creditors without appointing a surety to ensure his attendance ifrequired, providing guarantors.

4/3 A declaration of insolvency requires:

4/3/1  An application made by creditors demanding that a debtor whose  due  debts  exceed his  assets be  declared insolvent, subject to item 5/5; or

4/3/2  An application made by the debtor himself, except when the competent judicial authority considers his application to be fraudulent



1067





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency

4/4 The creditors are not required to prove that they are the sole creditors.
If another  creditor  appears before the distribution, he is entitled  to a pro-rata share  of the  distribution.  If a creditor  appears  after the distribution, the rule set out in item 8 shall apply subject to statutory procedures  so long as they are not inconsistent with the rules and principles  of Sharf'ah.

4/5 The court has the sole authority to declare a person  insolvent.

5. Consequences of Insolvency

Declaration of a debtor's insolvency  gives rise to the following  conse•
quences:

5/1  An admission  by a debtor, who has been declared insolvent, of any liability to another  person  relating to his sequestered  assets has no legal effect, whether such admission relates to a debt incurred before or after the declaration  of insolvency, unless the creditors accept that such debt was incurred  before the declaration  of insolvency.

5/2  The debts owed to creditors  are attached  to the existing property of the debtor at the time of sequestration as well as to any property that accrues  to him  without  his dealing, such as gifts. All his property remains  in his ownership  until  it is determined that  such property be sold and that the proceeds be distributed among the creditors.

5/3 The  debtor's  acts  of sale,  gift or  endowment  subsequent to  the declaration  of insolvency have no legal effect, with the exception  of acts relating to previous transactions, such as terminating a defective contract and  exercising  an option  to terminate.  Such lack of legal effect  applies  during  the  period of uncertainty that precedes the declaration  of insolvency, as assessed by the competent authority.

5/4 After  declaration  of insolvency, all the  debtor's subsequent  acts of sale, purchase,  admission   ( of liability)  or  guarantee,  are  attached to his future  liability and  not  to the sequestered  assets. He can be required  to discharge  such subsequent  liabilities after revocation  of the sequestration. Those whose rights attach to his liability are not entitled to share the sequestered assets with the creditors.



1068





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency

5/5/1 All ofthe debtor's undue debts become due despite the creditors of such  undue   debts  having  no  present   right  to  demand a declaration of his insolvency. The creditors of undue debts are entitled to share the sequestered assets with the creditors of due debts.
5/5/2 If the  lessee becomes  insolvent  during  the  Ijarah  term, the lessor shall be entitled,  on a pro-rata basis along with  other creditors, to the amount  of rent  corresponding to the period during  which  the  usufruct  was enjoyed.  For the  remaining period, the  lessor  shall have  the  option  either  to  terminate the Ijarah contract or to carry on with it so that he has claims on the insolvency assets for the rent of the remaining  period, while  enabling  the  lessee  to  enjoy  the  usufruct  unless  the court considers continuity  of the ljarah to be in the interest of creditors, in which case the lessor shall receive the rent amount in full.

5/6  It is permissible, with the approval ofthe creditors, to agree to reduce undue  debt  that  was accelerated  by the  declaration  of insolvency and guarantors  are liable to pay the reduced amount,  rather than the amount  originally guaranteed.

5/7 Undue debts owed to the insolvent debtor do not become due upon insolvency; all outstanding debts owed to the insolvent debtor before the declaration of insolvency (even ifnot yet due) are included in the insolvency assets  ( and are distributed  to the creditors  as and when they are paid).

5/8  After distribution, creditors have no legal right to demand any unpaid debt from the debtor. However, the debtor has a moral obligation in Shari'ah to pay all the debts in full.

6. Right ofClaw-Back ofan Item Sold to the Debtor Prior to the Declaration of Insolvency (the Right of Claw-Back)

The right of claw-back gives a creditor who sold an item to the insolvent debtor the right to demand  return  of the specific item if it is among the



1069





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency

sequestered  assets or to have claims on these assets.  This right  shall  be established for the seller who has not received any part of the selling price.

7. Sale of the Sequestered Assets and Allowances Made for the Insolvent
Debtor

7/1  The  concerned   authorities  will  order  the  sale  of the  sequestered assets -other  than  the  assets described  below- whether  they  are in currencies different to the currency in which the insolvency is being administered, fungibles, stocks, commodities (goods or merchandise) or real estate. A reasonable period  of time should be allowed before selling  real  estate  assets,  and  assets  should  be  sold  in  the  order provided  above. A survey of market  prices should be conducted  to ensure  that  a better  price  could  not  be achieved  at auction. If the price offered  is less than  the value of the asset,  the auction  should be repeated  to obtain the value of the asset. Otherwise,  it should be sold at whatever price is achieved on the third auction. If possible, it is recommended to make the sale subject, for a reasonable period  of time, to an option to reverse the sale.

7/2 Excluded  from  the  sale  are  the  insolvent  debtor's tools  of trade; whatever  he  needs  to  continue  his business; a suitable  home  and basic expenses for him  and his dependents. If his home exceeds his requirements, it should be sold and replaced by one that is suitable for him. The same applies mutatis mutandis  to institutions.

7/3 The debtor is not required  to earn or take out a loan if the proceeds of sale are not sufficient to pay off his debts.

8. Distribution of the Insolvent  Debtor's Assets Among the Creditors

8/ 1  It is preferable to expedite the distribution but not with such excessive haste that it harms the insolvent  debtor. It is not necessary to delay the  distribution until  all insolvency  assets are sold. The proceeds may be distributed as and when they are received, which is required if the  creditors  demand  it,  taking  into  consideration the  statutory procedures  of insolvency provided that they do not conflict with the rules and principles of the Sharf'ah are observed



1070





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency

8/2 The judge should start the distribution  with assets that are of the same denomination  as the debt.

8/3 The following order should be observed during distribution:

8/3/1 Priority should be given to paying the fees ofthe administrators and  their  assistants  who  manage  the  process  of sale and distribution.

8/3/2 Next in order should be secured creditors, as per the rules of granting security.

8/3/3  Non-employee contractors (such as tradesmen) and lessors  of transport vehicles are entitled to declare a lien over any of the insolvent debtor's property in their possession in order to recover their full fees from the insolvency assets, and such property reverts to the insolvency assets once the fees are paid.

8/3/4 A person  who finds a specific item of his property  in the insolvency assets has a preferred claim over it. Such property may include safety deposits, portfolios, investment funds, the capital of Mudarabah  or investment agency, and the share of a non-insolvent partner  in a partnership managed  by the institution declared insolvent and the insolvency assets in the case of an insolvent partner.

8/3/5 The rest should be distributed among the creditors, with each creditor receiving an amount pro-rata to his share of the total debt.

8/3/6 If a debt is discovered after the distribution, the new creditor should obtain his share from each of the existing creditors, either by mutual consent or through litigation.

9. Rules Specific to Institutions

9/1  The following items are included in the insolvency assets:

9/1/1 Current accounts held with the institution, because these are liabilities ofthe institution which must be borne by it alone and which should not be borne by the investment accountholders;



1071





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency

9/1/2 All debts outstanding  against the institution.

9/2 Investmentvehicles that are independent ofan {insolvent) institution in their fund sources and revenues are not part of the insolvency assets. Such investment vehicles include restricted  deposits, funds, portfolios and Sukuk assets that are not wholly or partially owned by the institution and in which the institution's responsibility is limited to managing on a paid agency or Mudarabah basis.

9/3 Any assets held by the institution  as custodian, such as securities belonging to third parties and safety deposit boxes, are not part of the insolvency assets.

10. Revoking the Declaration of Insolvency

10/1  Upon distribution of the insolvent debtor's assets to the creditors, the declaration ofinsolvency is revoked by the court and announced according to the requirements of convention or statute.

10/2  After the declaration ofinsolvency is revoked, if an asset is discovered that came into the ownership of the insolvent debtor prior to the declaration ofinsolvency without reciprocal consideration, such as a gift, it is sequestered to be distributed among the creditors whose debts were outstanding  before the declaration  of insolvency. If statute restricts applications for a declaration of insolvency unless after expiry of a limitation period, the outstanding  debt remains a liability of the debtor based on morality/religious credence.

10/3 If the insolvent debtor enters into a credit transaction  after revo• cation of his declaration  of insolvency and then  owns property through  new transactions,  and  is thereafter  declared insolvent a second time, the creditors of the first insolvency are not enti• tled to a share of the assets of the second insolvency. If however, the new property came into his ownership without reciprocal con• sideration, such as a gift, the creditors of the first insolvency are entitled to a share of the assets of the second insolvency based on morality/religious credence.



1072





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency

11. Date of the Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 14 Jumada II, 1431 A.H., corresponding to
28 May 2010 A.D.




















































1073





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted the Standard of Insolvency in its meeting No. (27) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain during the period of 12-14 Jumada II, 1431 A.H., corresponding to 26-28 May 2010 A.D.












































1074





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 14 Jumada II, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 7 June  2009 A.D., the General Secretariat decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Insolvency.

In its meeting held in Dubai,  United Arab Emirates,  on 20 Shawwal
1430 A.H., corresponding to 9 October 2009 A.D., the Sharf'ah Standards Committee discussed the draft of a Sharf'ah Standard on Insolvency and made necessary amendments.

The revised draft ofthe Shari'ah Standard was presented to the Sharf'ah Board in its meeting No. (25) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, during the period  of 2-4 Dhu.1-Qa'dah  1430  A.H.,  corresponding  to 21-23 October
2009 A.D. The amendments that were deemed appropriate were included

The General Secretariat held a public hearing in the Kingdom ofBahrain, on 27 Safar 1431  A.H.,  corresponding to 11  February 2010 A.D.  All the comments made in the public hearing were listened to, and a member of the Shari'ah Board answered these comments and made commentary on them.

In its 26th meeting held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, during the period of24-26 Rabi' I, 1431 A.H., corresponding to 10-12 March 2010 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the amendments proposed by the participants in the public hearing and incorporated  the amendments  that it considered suitable.

In its meeting No. (27) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, during the period of 12-14 Jumada II, 1431  A.H., corresponding to 26-28 May 2010
A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the draft of the Standard, incorporated



1075





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency

the necessary amendments that it deemed appropriate,  and adopted the
Standard.

In its meeting held in  the United Arab Emirates on 7 Sha'ban  1436
A.H., corresponding to 25 May 2015 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Review Committee  reviewed this  Standard.  After deliberation,  the  committee approved necessary amendments, and the  Standard was adopted in  its current amended version.














































1076





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


The basis for prohibiting a person overwhelmed by debts from disposals that harm the creditors is the Hadith,  "Allah will pay (the debts of) a per• son who takes the wealth ofothers with the intention ofrepaying it. But the one who takes it with the intention ofdestroying it, Allah will destroy him".
■  The basis for the obligatory ruling of insolvency and interdiction against the one who has more debts than he can pay is the act of the Prophet (peace be upon him), who interdicted Mu'adh Ibn Jabal (may Allah be pleased with him) and sold his property for the debts against him and distributed  it among his creditors. This is the stance of the majority, who include Abu Yusuf and Muhammad This is also the formal legal opinion of the Hanafis as against Abu Hanifah.
■  The multiplicity ofthree stages is the Maliki opinion, and this is what the (modern) legal codes also uphold. In insolvency, it is essential to consult these rules and the ruling ofthe court.
• The basis for the requirement that the insolvency should be demanded by the owners of due debts is that there is no demand (warranted) for undue debt. Even if such a demand is made of the debtor, he does not have to pay it because the deferred period has a share in the price.
■  The basis for the right of a debtor to request a declaration of his own insolvency is the Shafi'i opinion and the fact that it is in his interest to sta• bilize his financial situation. The Standard excludes fraudulent insolvency according to the satisfaction of the court.
■  The basis for the requirement  of a judicial ruling for insolvency is the act of the Prophet (peace be upon him) in the case of Mu'adh. Also, in-

(2) This has been related by AI-Bayhaqi by both muttasil (fully connected) and mursal (incomplete) chains oftransmission, but the mursal narrations are more correct: "Sunan Al-Bayhaqi" [6: 48]; and "Talkhis AL- Habir [3: 37],  as in "Al-Mawsuah" [5: 301].



1077





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency

solvency needs consideration and Ijtihad; therefore, a judicial decision is required  for it.
■  The basis for non-enforcement of an insolvent's confession  regarding the
right of others to his property -except with the approval of the creditors• and the non-enforcement of his dispositions  that  transfer ownership  is that they prevent harm  to the creditors, as per the Hadith:  "No harm and no reciprocal harm".
■  The basis for the attachment of new dispositions  to the liability of the in• solvent is that the right of the creditor is attached to the property existing at the time of insolvency. Thus there is no harm  in the attachment of new dispositions  to the liability of the debtor because his liability is fit for such a commitment.
■  The basis for the view that gives the creditor the right to reclamation -a view accepted by the Malikis, Shafi'is, Hanbalis and some of the earliest scholars (the Salaf) as well as the majority of (modern  legal) systems- is the Hadith related by Al-Bukhari and Muslimthat affirms the right to recourse for the seller when he finds the exact commodity with the insolvent buyer. He has the option to take it or to leave it and become a partner ofthe creditors in the distribution  of the price. It is subject to the following conditions:
a) The insolvent  should  be alive at the time of recourse. In the case of
an institution or company, it should  remain  existent.
b) The insolvent  remains  liable for all of the compensation due.  If the seller has received part  of it, he will be given an option regarding  the remainder.
c) The whole  asset should  remain  in the  ownership  of the  insolvent.
If all or part  of it has been destroyed,  or if it has left his ownership through sale, or gift, or endowment, the right to reclamation will be cancelled regarding  the remaining part  except when  the transaction involves multiple  parties.
d) The  asset should  not be in  a condition where it is mingled with something from  which  it cannot be distinguished, nor  can its cha• racteristics have changed  to the point  that  the original name  for it no longer  applies or that its value has been  reduced.

(3) See:  "Fath AL-Bari" [5: 66]; and "Sahih Muslim" [3:  1193].



1078





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency

e) The  right  of another  person  should  not  relate to it,  e.g.,  when  the insolvent  has pledged  it as security, except when  the  owner  of the right  (the mortgagee)  renounces  his right to the mortgage.
The  right  to reclamation  is the  cancellation  of the  sale. It can take place verbally  or by a substitute  means.  It takes place immediately and does not  need the decision  of a judge,  or the knowledge  of the competent  authority, or the ability to deliver.
Besides  that,  if the  asset  or its value  or  its  feature  decreased,  or
an inseparable increase occurred in it, like an increase in the weight of livestock, and he chose reclamation, he will only have that. But if the increase  is separate,  it would belong to the insolvent.
The right to reclaim land is not precluded  by any building built on it by the insolvent  nor by any trees he planted  on it. The creditor will be given an option between having the insolvent remove the building and the trees, with the creditor  bearing  liability for any damage  (to what  is moved),  or taking  the building  and  trees  and  paying  their price.  In case of cultivated  land, the crop will remain  until  harvest, free of any charge.
■  The basis for the other view, which does not recognize the right to recla•
mation, is that the Hadith related by Al- Bukhari and Muslim contravenes the implication  of a Shari'ah principle;  i.e., the liability of the insolvent remains operative and the creditor's right regarding that liability remains
stable. This group cited the Hadith:  '.iinyone who died or went insolvent,
and some of his creditors found exactly their property,  they are on a par with the other creditors"•
Mursal Hadiths are valid evidence according to those who take this view. They are Hanafis and some of the Salaf.6°
The basis for non-inclusion of all types of deposits of safekeeping in the insolvency assets is that they are not the property of the insolvent; inter-

(4) This has been related by Al-Daraqutni by a mursal chain oftransmission. See also iil•
Mawsuah AL-Fiqhiyyah [5: 311].
(5) See: "AI-Mawsuah AL-Fiqhiya" [5: 311], for the documentation ofthe reference works of the madhhabs  that affirm the right of reclamation and for the details related to the right ofreclamation.



1079





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency

diction only occurs regarding his property,  not the property of others entrusted to him.
■  The basis for the requirement of a court ruling to rescind the interdiction
of an insolvent is that it demands due consideration and Ijtihad, just as with a declaration of insolvency.

















































1080





Sharf'ah Standard No (43): Insolvency





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Tsar

The present inability to discharge the financial obligations established in one's liability.

Prudential or Precautionary or Preventive Interdiction
Expedited and streamlined  interdiction  aiming at placing the debtor's assets underjudicial supervision so that the creditor precludes the existence of a threat to his receipt ofthe full payment of his debt.


































1081


























Shari'ah  Standard No. (44)



Obtaining and Deploying Liquidity












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                           1087
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................      1088

1. Scope of the Standard..............................................................................      1088
2. Definition of Liquidity and Liquidity Management                                1088
3. Need to Utilise Liquidity in Institutions...............................................      1088
4. Obtaining and Deploying Liquidity.......................................................      1088
5.  Liquidity Should Only Be Deployed Using Shari'ah-Compliant Modes ..        1090
6. Date of the Issuance of the Standard......................................................      1091
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1092
Appendices
Appendix (a):  BriefHistory ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1093
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard..................................        1094
Appendix (c):  Definitions............................................................................        1095

























1085








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to define liquidity and the methods  of obtaining, deploying and utilising it within Institutions.co



































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



1087





Shari'ah Standard No (44): Obtainin g and Deploying Liquidity





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard  covers what is meant by liquidity and the permissible means of obtaining and deploying it.

2. Definition  of Liquidity and Liquidity Management

2/1  Liquidity refers to cash or that which can be easily converted to cash.

2/2 Liquidity management means achieving a balance between obtain• ing liquidity as swiftly and cheaply as possible and investing and deploying it effectively.

Liquidity is achieved  in various  ways depending  on where  it is being utilised. For example, in institutions  it is the ability to cover withdrawals; in the money market it is the ability to swiftly convert securities into cash; and with Sukuk and investment funds, it is the ability to redeem or sell them in the secondary market.

3. Need to Utilise Liquidity in Institutions

Institutions need liquidity to meet numerous requirements, such as:

3/1 To distribute profits, which may rely on the liquidation of assets, see Shari'ah Standard No. (40) on Distribution  of Profit in Mudarabah• Based Investment Accounts.

3/2 To discharge liabilities by selling inventory assets and converting them to cash to pay what is owed to creditors, to face contingent liabilities, or liquidate investment vehicles or the institution itself, and similarly to expand its activities, or to achieve capital adequacy or to improve its credit rating, see Sharf'ah Standard No. (43) on Insolvency.

4.  Obtaining and Deploying Liquidity

4/1  Obtaining and deploying liquidity through interest-bearing loans is prohibited by the Shari'ah, whether transacted  directly or through



1088





Shari'ah Standard No (44): Obtainin g and Deploying Liquidity

overdrafts or interest-bearing  or commission-based facilities. Any liquidity support made available by supervisory or regulatory bodies (such as central banks) must be provided only through  Shari'ah• compliant modes, such as Mudarabah and investment agency.

4/2 Permissible modes of obtaining liquidity include:

4/2/1 Selling  commodities  on  a Salam (deferred delivery)  basis, receiving payment up-front, and then purchasing the relevant commodities for delivery on the maturity date. It is permitted to secure a promise to sell (from a third  party commodity broker)  to mitigate the risk of fluctuation between the sale price and purchase price. [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (IO) on Salam and Parallel Salam]

4/2/2 Istisna'a concluding an Istisnaa-based sale contract stipulating advance payment -although advance payment is not obliga• tory- and concluding a parallel Istisna'a-based purchase con• tract stipulating deferred or installment payment. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (11) on Istisna'a and Parallel lstisna'a]

4/2/3 The institution  selling some of its assets for immediate cash and then,  if required, leasing the asset back on rent payable in arrears,  taking  into  consideration  what has been stated in Shari'ah Standard No. (9), item 5/8, on Ijarah and Ijarah Muntahiah Bittamleek.

4/2/4 Financing working capital to expand the institution's activities

This involves the institution inviting investors to participate in financing its working capital on a Mudarabah or Musharakah basis for a specified period oftime determined by its liquidity requirements and with the ability to liquidate the Mudarabah or Musharakah at the end of such period. The investors enter into  the  Mudarabah  or Musharakah  by contributing  their capital while the  institution  contributes  its current  assets, after valuation, as its share ofthe capital ofthe Musharakah or Mudarabah. The institution's fixed assets do not form part of



1089





Shari'ah Standard No (44): Obtainin g and Deploying Liquidity

the Musharakah; rather, fixed assets are either lent or leased to the venture and rental payments are accounted as expenses of the Mudarabah or Musharakah.

4/2/5 Issuing investment Sukuk to expand the institution's activities

This involves issuing the types of investment Sukuk explained in Shari'ah Standard No.  (17) on Investment  Sukuk in order to obtain funds from Sukuk investors and undertake  projects required ofthe institution. The institution may securitise some of its assets by selling them to Sukuk subscribers, managing the assets on their behalf and promising to purchase them at the market price or at a price to be agreed. If the institution is only the lessee and not the manager ofthe Sukuk assets, it may promise to purchase them at face value.

4/2/6 Tawarruq

This should be done in accordance with Sharf'ah Standard No. (30) on Tawarruq.

4/2/7 Interest-free loan

An application  of interest-free loans is outlined  in Shari'ah Standard No. (26) on Islamic Insurance in item 10/8 regarding loans given by the Takaful operator to the Takaful fund.

5. Liquidity Should Only Be Deployed Using Shari'ah-Compliant Modes, which include:
5/1  Purchasing commodities in cash and selling them for deferred payment through Musawamah or Murabahah contracts.

5/2 Leases, lease contracts  that end in ownership  and forward leases, whether for tangible assets or services.

5/3  Purchasing commodities  on a Salam basis (immediate payment for deferred delivery), then  selling them after taking physical or con• structive delivery, whether personally or by appointing the seller, in a separate contract, to sell the commodities to his customers.



1090





Shari'ah Standard No (44): Obtainin g and Deploying Liquidity

5/4  Istisna'a and parallel Istisna'a, which involve the institution commis• sioning the manufacture of products or projects on an Istisna'a basis with immediate payment for deferred delivery upon completion and then selling the same manufactured products to a third party through a second Istisna'a  contract for deferred price and delivery,  without linking the two contracts, or procuring the sale by appointing the manufacturer  as an agent, through a separate contract, to sell the man• ufactured product or project to his customers.

5/5 Musharakah and Mudarabah which involve the institution as the capital provider.

5/6  Investment agency, which involves the institution appointing another institution or those with whom it deals to act as its agents.

5/7 Subscription to purchase Shari'ah-compliant stocks, investment Sukuk or shares in investment funds.

5/8  International commodity trading in the financial markets in accordance with Shari'ah.

5/9  Currency trading in accordance with Shari'ah.

6. Date of the Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 14 Jumada II, 1431 A.H., corresponding to
28 May 2010 A.D.






















1091





Shari'ah Standard No (44): Obtainin g and Deploying Liquidity





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted the Standard of Obtaining and Deploying Liquidity in its meeting No. (27) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain during the period of 12-14 Jumada II, 1431 A.H., corresponding to 26-28 May 2010 A.D.












































1092





Shari'ah Standard No (44): Obtainin g and Deploying Liquidity





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 24 Dhul-Qa'dah  1428  A.H., corresponding to 3  December  2007
A.D., the General Secretariat decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Obtaining and Deploying Liquidity.

In its 25th meeting held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, during the period of
2-4 Dhul-Qadah  1430 A.H., corresponding to 21-23 October 2009 A.D., the Sharf'ah Standards Committee discussed the draft of a Shari'ah Standard on Obtaining and Deploying Liquidity and made the necessary amendments.

The General Secretariat held a public hearing in the Kingdom ofBahrain, on 27 Safar 1431 A.H.,  corresponding  to 11  February 2010 A.D. All the comments made in the public hearing were listened to, and a member ofthe Shari'ah Board answered these comments and made commentary on them.

In its meeting  No. (26) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, during  the period  of 24-26 Rabi' I, 1431  A.H., corresponding  to 10-12 March 2010
A.D.,  the  Sharf'ah Board  discussed  the  amendments   proposed  by the participants  in the public hearing and incorporated the amendments  that it considered suitable.

In its meeting No. (27) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain, during the period of 12-14 Jumada II, 1431 A.H., corresponding to 26-28 May 2010 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the draft ofthe Standard, incorporated the necessary amendments that it deemed appropriate, and adopted the Standard.

In its meeting  held in the United  Arab Emirates,  on 7 Sha'ban  1436
A.H., corresponding to 25 May 2015 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Review Committee  reviewed  this  Standard. After  deliberation, the  committee approved  necessary amendments, and the Standard was adopted  in its current amended version.



1093





Shari'ah Standard No (44): Obtainin g and Deploying Liquidity





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


The basis for the definition ofliquidity as referring to cash and whatever is easily converted into cash is that the traditional terminology for liqui• dity is Tandid  (literally, to convert to cash), actually or by estimation. Actual Tandid means converting commodities into cash by selling them. Tandid by estimation means evaluating commodities in order to arrive at the expected monetary value that can be realized from them.
■  The basis that profit distribution  depends on the availability of liquidity
is that there cannot be any profit except after the protection ofthe capital, and this protection is realized by liquidating the assets.
■  The basis for the prohibition of procuring liquidity through interest-based
loans is the prohibition of any type of Riha (usury). The supervisory bodies are the entities most responsible for overseeing that the institutions' liquidity is compliant with Shari'ah. This is because it is these bodies that have licensed the institutions to operate by Shari'ah-compliant procedures and prohibited them from that which violates the Shari'ah.
■  The basis for the Shari'ah-compliant methods ofobtaining liquidity is pro•
vided in the Sharf'ah standard for each method.
■  The basis for the Shari'ah-compliant methods ofdeploying liquidity is pro•
vided in the Sharf'ah standard for each method.

















1094





Shari'ah Standard No (44): Obtainin g and Deploying Liquidity





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Diversification of Liquidity

The deployment ofliquidity in various instruments; for example, purchas• ing short-term, medium-term and long-term Sukuk to protect investments from sharp fluctuations in the returns.

Liquidity Preference

It means to hold on to cash instead ofdeploying it. That is for the purpose offinancing current purchases, or investing it in securities whose prices are expected to decline, or paying for contingent expenses.

Liquidity Balance

It means reconciling the need to obtain liquidity and the need to deploy it.

Liquidity Surplus

The availability of liquidity exceeding the institution's needs.

Liquidity Deficit

The need for liquidity in order to meet financial requirements.

Good Liquidity

It is based on two principles: The best price and the shortest period for obtaining it.

Liquidity Risk

It is the risk ofhaving to sell commodities or securities at a loss in order to procure liquidity.









1095























Shari'ah Standard No. (45)



Protection of Capital and Investments












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface...................................................................................................      1101
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................      1102

1. Scope of the Standard..............................................................................      1102
2. Definition of Capital and Investment Protection and the Difference
Between Protection and Guarantee                                                        1102
3. Shari'ah Ruling.........................................................................................      1102
4.  Shari'ah Compliant Means for Protecting Capital........................     1103
5. Shari'ah Non-Compliant Means for Protecting Capital                          1106
6. Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................      1106
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1107
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1108
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard..................................        1110
Appendix (c):  Definitions.............................................................................       1114
























1099








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims at explaining the most important ways ofprotecting capital and investments in Islamic financial Institutions.    It also aims to explain what is permissible according to the Shari'ah and what is not permissible  as well as the Shari'ah basis for it.































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



1101





Sharf'ah Standard  No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers the instruments and methods used to protect capital and investments from loss, decrease and destruction.

2. Definition of Capital and Investment Protection  and the Difference
Between Protection and Guarantee

Protection  of capital and investments  means using available methods to prevent loss, decrease or destruction. It is wider than a guarantee of invested capital, as a guarantee is an undertaking by a particular party to bear any loss, decrease or destruction of the capital. On the other hand, protection refers to the safeguarding of capital.

3. Shari'ah Ruling

3/1  Protecting capital by permissible means is desirable in Sharf'ah as it serves the objectives of Sharf'ah with regard to wealth.
3/2 It is compulsory for an investment manager, whether he is a Mudarib, an investment agent or a managing partner, in his fiduciary capacity, to exercise due diligence to protect the funds from loss, decrease or destruction. If he fails to do so using usual means ofprotection, he is liable (for loss), taking into consideration items 4/1 and 7/1.

3/3 It is permissible to use Sharf'ah-compliant instruments and processes to protect investment from risks that it may be exposed to whether they are risks relating to a loss ofcapital, depreciation in value, inflation, or the fluctuation of exchange rates, etc.

3/4 The investment manager acts in a fiduciary capacity with regard to the funds.  He is not liable for loss of capital except in case of his wilful misconduct, negligence or breach of contractual terms and conditions.



1102





Sharf'ah Standard  No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments

3/5 The efforts exerted by the investment manager to grow the capital must be suitable for the nature of the relevant investment. It is also incumbent  on him  to  take professional measures that  normally provide suitable protection  for the  funds.  Otherwise, he will  be deemed negligent.

3/6 It is not permissible to stipulate in an investment agreement that the investment manager is unconditionally liable for any loss of capital in cases other than willful misconduct, negligence and breach of contractual terms and conditions.

3/7 Ifa loss occurs caused bythe Mudaribs wilfulmisconduct, negligence or breach of contract, the capital provider may hold the Mudarib liable for the loss of capital but not the loss of profit. However,  if it is determined through actual or constructive liquidation that the investment accrued profit which was added to the capital and then suffered a loss due to the Mudarib's wilful misconduct,  negligence or breach of contract, the Mudarib is liable to idemnify for loss of that profit as it has become a part of the capital  If destruction  of the whole or a part of the capital is caused by the Mudarib's wilfil misconduct, negligence or breach of contract, the Mudarib is liable for the value ofthe capital

4. Shari'ah Compliant Means for Protecting Capital

4/1  Instruments and processes used to protect capital and investments must fulfill the following  conditions:

4/1/1  The investment  partners  should bear the  risks and losses according to their respective shares in the capital.

4/1/2 The objective should not be to hold the investment manager liable in cases other than willful misconduct, negligence or breach of contract.

4/1/3 The means adopted for capital protection must not be a non• Shari'ah compliant contract and should not be a pretext to achieve an objective violating Shari'ah.



1103





Sharf'ah Standard  No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments

4/2 Some permissible methods of protecting capital include:

4/2/1  Takaful  (Islamic insurance) for the investment to protect the capital or cover the risks  of willful  misconduct,  negligence, breach  of contract, procrastination, death  or bankruptcy. Takaful  coverage  may be  obtained either by the  investors themselves or through the investment manager on their behalf.
4/2/2 Obtaining Takaful cover for the leased assets underlying the Sulcuk or other instruments against the risk of destruction and for major maintenance.
4/2/3 An undertaking provided by Takaful institutions to guarantee exports and investments.
4/2/4 A voluntary undertaking by a third party acting in the public interest, such as the state, or relevant public interest autho• rities, such as a guardian, executor or father, to indemnify against a loss of capital without any right of recourse to the investment manager, such as a government pledge in respect of an investment  project.  In order for this undertaking  to be valid, the third  party  should be administratively  inde• pendent  of the investment manager and there should be no direct or indirect ownership relationship of more than a half between the investment manager and the third party.
4/2/5 An undertaking  by a third party to indemnify against a loss of capital resulting  from  the  investment  manager's  wilful misconduct  or negligence without  receiving consideration for providing such a guarantee. However, the guarantor has the right of recourse to the investment manager.
4/2/6 Creating reserves to protect the capital through  deductions from the investors' share ofprofits but not from the investment manager's share of profits due to him in his capacity as the Mudarib.
4/2/7  Diversifying the investment assets to achieve an appropriate return and minimize risks. This may include:



1104





Sharf'ah Standard  No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments

a) Combining  real assets, such as real estate and commodities with financial assets (such as stocks and Sukuk) or combining assets denominated  in two different currencies.
b) Dividing the capital into two parts by deploying the capital in Murabahah and Musharakah contracts,  respectively.
The first part  is used in Murabahah contracts  with parties that have strong credit ratings in a way that the combination of the  principal  amount   and  the  profit  of Murabahah protect the initial capital and the second part  is invested in Musharakah  contracts.
c) Dividing the capital into two parts by deploying the capital in Ijarah and Musharakah contracts  respectively.
The first part  is used  in Ijarah  contracts  with parties  that have  strong  credit  ratings  in  a way that  the  combination of the principal  amount  and the rental amount  protect  the initial capital and the second part is invested in Musharakah contracts.
d) Dividing  the capital into two parts  and deploying them  in
Murabahah and 'Arboun contracts  respectively.

The first part  is used in Murabahah  contracts with parties that have strong credit ratings in a way that the combination of the principal amount and the profit of Murabahah protect the  initial  capital.  The  second  part   is  used  in  'Arboun contracts to purchase assets.  If the value of the assets rises, the purchase contracts are completed and the assets are sold for a profit. If the value of the assets declines,  the purchase contracts  are not  completed  and  the loss is limited  to the amount of the 'Arboun, while the capital is protected by the Murabahah  contracts.  It is compulsory  in  this  method  to observe the Shari'ah rules relating to 'Arboun. This includes the requirement to reserve the assets sold under the 'Arboun contract from the time of contract conclusion until the settlement date and the impermissibility oftrading in 'Arboun contracts.  [see Shari'ah Standard No. (53) on 'Arboun]



1105





Sharf'ah Standard  No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments

4/2/8  Taking  security  and  guarantees  in  Murabahah,  Salam or
Istisna'a contracts to ensure that debts are paid.
4/2/9 A  sale  with  an  option  to  terminate  due  to  non-payment
(Khiyar al-Naqd).

4/2/10 It is permissible to use other  permissible instruments  and processes with the consent ofthe investor to protect the capital from risks, whether those risks are related to the destruction of the  original  investment  capital,  depreciation  in  value, inflation or the fluctuation of exchange rates, etc.
4/2/11  If the investor has required the investment manager to adopt certain  Shari'ah-compliant ways  to protect  the  capital,  the manager is obligated to do so. Ifhe does not do so, he is liable for any resulting loss of capital, in accordance with item 4/4.

5. Shari'ah Non-Compliant Means for Protecting  Capital

It is not permissible to protect the capital by Sharf'ah-non-compliant means or means that result in violations of the Shari'ah, such as:

5/1  Stipulating that the investment manager is liable for loss of capital.

5/2 An undertaking by a third party to indemnify for loss ofcapital in the cases other than wilful misconduct or negligence of the investment manager with a right (of the third party) to have recourse to the investment manager.

5/3 A commitment by or obligating the investment manager to purchase the investment assets at their nominal price or at a price that was initially agreed upon.

5/4 An undertaking by a third party to guarantee the capital for a fee.
This is a form of conventional insurance.

5/5 Protecting the capital by use of conventional hedging contracts such as futures, options and swaps.

6. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 24 Dhul-Qa'dah 1431 A.H., corresponding to 30 November 2010 A.D.



1106





Sharf'ah Standard  No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted this Standard in its meeting No. (28) held
in the Kingdom of Bahrain during the period of 22-24 Dhul-Qa'dah 1431
A.H., corresponding to 27-29 May 2011 A.D.













































1107





Sharf'ah Standard  No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 24 Dhul-Qadah 1428  A.H.,  corresponding to 20 December 2007
A.D., the General Secretariat decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Protection of Capital and Investments.
In its meeting held in Kuwait, on 20 Shawwal 1430 A.H., corresponding to 9 February 2009 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee discussed the draft of a Shari'ah Standard on Protection of Capital and Investments and made necessary amendments.

The revised draft ofthe Shari'ah Standard was presented to the Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. (24) held in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, during the period of 25-27 Jumada II, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 18-20 June
2010 A.D. The amendments that were deemed appropriate were included.

The  General  Secretariat  held  a public  hearing  in  the  Kingdom of
Bahrain,  on  27 Safar  1431  A.H.,  corresponding  to  11  February  2010
A.D. All the comments made in the public hearing were listened to, and a member  of the Sharf'ah Board answered these comments and made commentary on them.

In its meeting No. (26) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, during the period of 24-26 Rabf' I,  1431  A.H., corresponding to 10-12  March 2010
A.D.,  the  Shari'ah  Board discussed the  amendments  proposed  by the participants in the public hearing and incorporated the amendments that it considered suitable.

In its meeting No. (28) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain during the period of 22-24 Dhul-Qadah 1431 A.H., corresponding to 28-30 November 2010
A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the draft of the Standard, incorporated



1108





Sharf'ah Standard  No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments

the necessary amendments that it deemed appropriate,  and adopted the
Standard.

In its meeting held in Al-Madinah Al-Minawwarah, on 30 Sha'ban 1436
A.H., corresponding to 17 June 2015 A.D., the Sharf'ah Standards Review Committee  reviewed this  Standard.  After  deliberation, the  committee approved necessary amendments, and the Standard was adopted  in  its current amended version.














































1109





Sharf'ah Standard No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


■    The basis for capital protection being a desirable objective is the Divine Command to  adopt ways  and  means  to  protect  wealth  like  having witnesses  and  documentation  of the  financial  contracts and  securing debt with  mortgages  and  the  like. Protection of wealth  is one  of the essential objectives that the Shari'ah has taken care of.
■  The  basis  for the  obligation  of the  manager  to  take  due  diligence  to
protect the investment  is that his role regarding the investment  is that of a fiduciary. This means that he should manage the investment in a way that serves the interest of the capital provider  in his capacity of his fiduciary representative. He should thus use prudent means consistent with accepted standard practice to increase the funds.
■  The basis for using permissible means to protect the investment is that all
(financial) contracts  are permissible  by default unless proved otherwise. Furthermore, these instruments achieve the intent of the Shari'ah to safe• guard wealth.
■  The basis for the investment  manager  not being liable for the loss of the
capital, except in  cases of his wilful  misconduct  and  negligence  is the consensus ofMuslim jurists. That is because he takes the capital with the owner's permission  and deals with it in the interest ofthe capital provider. He is thus  the  capital provider's  representative  in  terms  of possessing and managing the capital. This means that the loss or destruction of the capital in his possession  is just like its loss or destruction while in the possession of its owner because he took it with his permission. Moreover, no person, including the manager is liable to anything without a specific command  by Sharf'ah.

(2) "AI-Bahr AL-Ra'iq" [6: 313];  "AL-Bahjah Sharh AL-Tuhfah" [2: 217]; "Mayyarah 'AlaAL•
'Asimiyyah" [2: 131]; and "AL-Mughni" [7: 76].



1110





Sharf'ah Standard No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments

■  The basis for the impermissibility to stipulate  an absolute  guarantee  to be provided  by the  manager,  is that  this  condition   strips  partnership (Mudarabah and  Musharakah)  and  agency  contracts  of their  essential content, and turns them into a guaranteed  loan contract. Moreover, these contracts  are based  upon  trusteeship,  and this  condition  violates their nature  and implications;  hence, it is void. Ibn Qudamah said, "The third type (i.e., of invalid conditions)  is to stipulate what is not in the interest of the contract nor consistent with its nature and implications; e.g., stipu• lating that the partner is liable for the capital or for a share of the loss. There is no disagreement  among the jurists that this condition  is void.
■   The basis for the opportunity cost not being compensated in the events of
wilful misconduct or negligence is that it is non-existent wealth which has not been realised yet. However, realized profit after actual or constructive liquidation  is treated  like capital.
Shari'ah-Compliant Means for Protecting  Capital
■    The basis for stipulating  equality among the partners  in bearing  loss is that  partnership is based  on equality between  the  partners. Stipulating that some partners  should bear the loss more than  others should violates the nature and implications of a partnership contract. Bearing the portion of loss that  is supposed  to be borne  by another  partner causes the latter partner  to gain profit  from  that  for which  he has assumed  no liability. The jurists  agree that loss sharing in the partnership contract  should be proportional to capital (contribution).6
■  The basis for the permissibility to protect the capital with Takaful against any type of investment risks is that Takaful is an undertaking to make donations between the participants. It is not a contract to exchange counter-values (Mu'awadah).  Its purpose  is to achieve cooperation  and solidarity among the participants.  Hence, the Sharf'ah prohibitions that apply to (conventio• nal) commercial insurance do not apply to it.
■  The basis for the permissibility  of a third  party's undertaking to bear the loss without the right of recourse to the manager is that, according to the

(3) AL-Mghni" [5: 41].
(4) "AL-Mabsut" [15: 84]; "AL-Bahjah Sharh A1-Tuhfah" [2: 217];  "AL-Hawi AL-Kabir" [9:  113];
and "AL-Maughnr" [7: 179].
(5) "Bada't' Al-Sana'i" [7: 517]; "Hashiyat Al-Dusuqt" [3: 353]; "Tuhfat AL-Muhtaj" [5: 292];
and "A-Furu" [4: 403].



1111





Sharf'ah Standard No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments

Shari'ah, this is an undertaking to make a voluntary donation. Therefore, it is permissible by the Sharf'ah provided that the third party is independent from the manager so that his undertaking does not result in the manager becoming the guarantor.
■  The basis for permissibility  of deducting  reserve amounts  (from  the
profits) is that it is done with the consent of the relevant parties and is in the investors' interest as it strengthens the investment's financial situation. No deduction should be made from the manager's share because the liability for loss is borne by the capital providers, not by the manager.
■  The basis for the permissibility of diversifying investment assets is that diversification  achieves the interest  of the investors. It does not  fall under the prohibition  of combining contracts in one contract because each contract  is conducted  independently of the other, whereby the manager divides the capital into parts and each part is invested independently in one type of contract or investment  asset that differs from what the other portion  ofthe capital is invested in. This is for the purpose  of mitigating  risks and diversifying returns.  The parameters for each of these contracts may be sought by referring to the relevant Shari'ah Standard.
■  The basis for the permissibility of obtaining securities and guarantees
for deferred payment contracts  is the Quranic Verse:  {"And ifyou  are on a journey and cannotfind a scribe, then (you may resort to holding
somethingas) mortgage, taken into possession},and {"...who produces
it is (the reward of) a camel load; I guarantee it}.
■  The basis for the liability of the manager to bear the loss if he violates the Shari'ah-compliant conditions stipulated by the capital provider is the Quranic Verse: {"O you who believe! Fulfil (your) obligations}."
• Fulfilling contractual obligations requires the fulfilment ofthe conditions stipulated in them. The Prophet (peace be upon him) said,  "Muslims are

(6) [Al-Baqarah (The Cow): 283].
(7) [Yusuf (The Prophet Joseph): 72]. (8) [A1-Ma 'idah (The Table): 1].



1112





Sharf'ah Standard No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments

bound by their conditions (stipulated in contracts  and undertakings). Breaching these conditions  amounts  to negligence from the manager. Hence,  it is compulsory  upon  him to bear  any loss arising from this breach.
Shari'ah Non-Compliant Means for Protecting  Capital
■  The basis for the prohibition of a third party's undertaking to bear the loss with the right of recourse to the manager is that this condition results in making the manager liable for the loss, which is prohibited by the Shari'ah.
■    The basis for prohibiting  the manager  from undertaking to buy the investment assets at their face value or at a value initially agreed upon is that this condition results in the manager undertaking to bear the partial or complete loss of the assets' value, which is a forbidden condition  as aforementioned.
■  The basis for the prohibition ofa third party's guarantee for a fee received in exchange for the guarantee is that it firstly entails excessive ambiguity because the extent ofthe loss is unknown at the inception ofthe contract, and because giving a guarantee in exchange for a fee, is prohibited by the Shari'ah.
a  See Shari'ah  Standard No.  (20) on Sale of Commodities  in Organized
Markets for the basis ofthe prohibition oftrading in options, futures and swaps.








(9) Related by Al-Tirmidhi from the Hadith of Amr  Ibn 'Awf, may Allah be pleased with him, in "Kitab Al-Ahkam",  Chapter on "Ma Dhukira  'An  Rasuli Allah, peace be upon him, Fi Al-Sulh", No. (1272); it is related also by Abu Dawud from the Hadith of Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, in "Kitab Al-Aqdiyah, Chapter on "Bab Fi AI-Sulh", No. {3120); also it is related by Al-Darqutni from the Hadith of'A' ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, with the addition of "...that which is consistent with the truth", [2: 3]. It is an authentic Hadith when all its chains oftransmission are taken into consideration; "Taghliq AI-Ta'liq" [3: 280]; and "Fath AL-Bari" [4: 451].
(10) See Resolution No.  (63)  1/7 of the International  Islamic Fiqh Academy regarding
Financial Markets.



1113





Sharf'ah Standard  No. (45): Protection of Capital and Investments





Appendix  (C) Definitions


Wilful Misconduct by the Manager
Wilful misconduct by the manager that renders him liable is to do what he is not allowed to according to the dictates ofthe Shari'ah, or the contract, or customary practice.
Negligence by the Manager
Negligence by the manager that renders him liable is to fail to do what it is required ofhim by the Sharf'ah, or the contract, or customary practice.



































1114





















Shari'ah Standard No. (46)



Al-Wakalah Bi Al-Istithmar
(Investment Agency)












Contents


Subject                                                                                    Page

Preface...................................................................................................      1119
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................      1120

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                             1120
2. Definition of Investment Agency and Its Permissibility                         1120
3. Investment Agency: Integral Parts (Arkan) and Its Key Types              1120
4. Characteristics of Investment Agency...................................................      1121
5. Agency Fee................................................................................................      1121
6. Amount, Term and Profit ofthe Investment........................................      1122
7. Liability of an Investment Agent                                                            1123
8. Rights and Obligations ofthe Contracts Executed by the Agent.......      1123
9. Appointment  of a Sub-Agent..................................................................      1123
10. Restrictions Stipulated in Investment Agency......................................      1123
11. Rules of Investment Agency                                                                   1124
12. Contemporary Applications of Investment Agency.............................      1124
13. Date of Issuance of the Standard.............................................................      1126
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1127
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1128
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard..............................           1130














1117








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to explain the rules of Investment Agency applicable to Islamic financial institutions,co the conditions for its validity, its types, its implications and its contemporary applications.

































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



1119





Sharf' ah  Stan dard  No  (46 ):  AI -Wakal ah  Bi Al -lstithm ar  (Inves tm ent Agency)





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers Investment Agency in various fields, or parts thereof, and the powers and responsibilities of the principal  and the investment agent. It does not cover Agency in general or the acts of Uncommissioned Agent  (Fodooli)  as they  are covered by Sharf'ah  Standard No.  (23)  on Agency and the Acts of an Uncommissioned  Agent (Fodooli).
2. Definition of Investment Agency and Its Permissibility

2/1  Investment  Agency means appointing  another  person  to invest and grow one's wealth, with or without a fee.
2/2 Investment Agency is permissible subject  to the relevant  Shari'ah rules.

3. Investment Agency: Integral Parts (Arkan) and Its Key Types

3/1  The integral parts (Arkan) of a valid investment agency are offer and acceptance, the subject matter ofthe contract, and the two contracting parties (the principal and the agent). [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (23) for the conditions  that are required  for a valid agency and the rules relating to the acts of the uncommissioned agent (Fodooli)]

3/2 It is permissible to make  the  appointment of an  agent contingent agency upon the fulfillm ent of certain conditions  or to cause to take effect on a specified future  date. It is  also permissible  to stipulate conditions/restrictions that are compliant with Shari'ah. For further details, see Shari'ah Standard No.  (23).

3/3  It  is permissible  for the  investment agency  to  be  restricted to a particular kind  of investment,  or a specific place or be subject to other  restrictions. It is also permissible that  it be unrestricted, in which  case it would  still be restricted  by customary practice and that the agent acts in the principal's  best interests.



1120





Sharf' ah  Stan dard  No  (46 ):  AI -Wakal ah  Bi Al -lstithm ar  (Inves tm ent Agency)

3/4  It is not permissible for any one ofthe parties to unilaterally amend the restrictions  in the agency contract.  [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (23) for the types of agency]

4. Characteristics of Investment Agency

4/1  Investment agency contracts, whether remunerated or unremuner• ated, are binding  on institutions  because they are invariably fixed term contracts in which both parties agree not to terminate  within a specified period.

4/2 Where the parties  agreed to terminate  for a specified period, it is permissible for the contract to stipulate the right of one ofthe parties to terminate the contract unilaterally in specific circumstances.

4/3  When the term ofan agency expires, the agent is required not to enter into new investment activities, but may not liquidate ongoing existing investments.

5. Agency Fee

5/1  If the agency is remunerated, the agent's fee should either be a fixed amount or a percentage of the amount invested. It is also permissible to link the fee to an established index/benchmark  that is known to both parties and is referred to before every investment period after the fee of the first period has been determined. It should, however, be capped and floored (by assigning it maximum and minimum limits).

5/2  Ifthe fee was not specified in the contract and the agent customarily charges a fee as is normal practice in institutions then the agent will be entitled to a fee which is prevalent in the relevant markets. This also applies when the agent does not complete the task required after starting and realizing returns that are beneficial to the principal.

5/3  The principal is required to paythe investment agent's fees in accordance with stipulated time and manner.

5/4  It is permissible to stipulate that the agent, in addition to his fee, is entitled to all or part of any amount  over and above the expected profit as a performance  incentive.



1121





Sharf' ah  Stan dard  No  (46 ):  AI -Wakal ah  Bi Al -lstithm ar  (Inves tm ent Agency)

6. Amount,  Term and Profit of the Investment

6/1 The  amount and  term  of the  investment should  be  determined, irrespective of whether the  amount is paid  as a lump  sum  or in installments.

6/2 The principal is responsible  for any expenses related to the invest• ment  such  as transportation, storage, taxes, maintenance and  in• surance. It is not permissible to require the agent to pay them  from the  agent's own  funds,  or to defer any reimbursement due to the agent where he has paid them  on behalf of the principal  or to make such reimbursement subject to the yield of the investment. And the investment agent is liable, as a legal entity, for any expenses related to its employees or equipment.

6/3 The agent may start investment  activity before receiving the funds
(from the principal),  and with the principal's permission, by:

6/3/1  Incurring a debt on behalf of the principal  by purchasing  on credit;

6/3/2 Advancing a loan to the principal by purchasing  something  on his behalf.

6/4 Any loan advanced by the agent is construed  as an interest free loan which may not bring any benefit to the agent as creditor. The agent is entitled to its fee and performance incentive, without  consideration to the loan advanced.

6/5  The profit in its entirety is the right ofthe principal unless it is stipulated that the agent shall be entitled to all or part of any excess above the expected profit as a performance  incentive in addition to its fixed fee.

6/6  It is permissible for the agent, with the principal's consent, to set aside a portion  of the profit to create a profit equalisation reserve for the benefit of the principal.

6/7  Upon  liquidation, the balance  of the profit  equalisation  reserve  is returned  to the principal without affecting the agent's entitlement to the fixed fee or performance incentive  for the period  in which  the reserve was set aside.



1122





Sharf' ah  Stan dard  No  (46 ):  AI -Wakal ah  Bi Al -lstithm ar  (Inves tm ent Agency)

7. Liability of an Investment Agent

7/1  The agent acts in a fiduciary capacity in relation to the investment and therefore is not liable for any loss in cases other than willful misconduct, negligence, or breach  of contract  unless the breach happens to be advantageous to the principal such as selling an asset for a price higher than the price required by the principal. In situations where the agent is held liable for loss ofcapital, such liability is limited to the capital amount and the agent is not liable for loss of expected profit whether the capital was invested immediately or delayed or not invested at all.

7/2 If the investment results in profit or capital gain in case of a breach that  is advantageous  to the principal, then  such profit  or capital increase belongs to the principal without affecting the agent's right to its performance  incentive.

8. Rights and Obligations  of the Contracts Executed by the Agent

The results ofthe contract (like transfer of ownership and entitlement to the fee) belong to the principal. However, the rights and obligations (like pursuit ofpayment  or delivery including litigation) belong to the agent.

9. Appointment of a Sub-Agent

9/1  The investment agent is not permitted to appoint a sub-agent for the prescribed investment activities except for activities outside its area of expertise, or what is normally outside the capacity of the agent or its employees or where the principal grants the agent permission to subcontract.

9/2 The sub-agent appointed by the agent with the consent ofthe principal cannot be dismissed by the agent but can only be dismissed by the principal. However, ifthe principal authorizes the agent to appoint any sub-agent at his will, the agent is entitled to dismiss the sub-agent.

10. Restrictions Stipulated in Investment Agency

10/1 The investment agent must adhere to a restriction requiring it to consult the principal before any investment  and if any breach by the agent results in loss, the agent shall bear it.



1123





Sharf' ah  Stan dard  No  (46 ):  AI -Wakal ah  Bi Al -lstithm ar  (Inves tm ent Agency)

10/2 If the  Investment Agency is restricted  to activities  that  yield a minimum specified profit margin and the agent does not find such an investment, then  it should seek the principals consent before investment.  If it invests in lower-yielding transactions, it is liable to compensate  the principal  for the difference between the profit earned and the average profit prevalent  in the market (if it is less than the stipulated amount/percentage). It is not liable for the minimum profit margin specified for the investment by the principal. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (23) on Agency and the Acts of an Uncommissioned Agent (Fodooli), item 6/3/2]

11. Rules of Investment  Agency

If the agent co-mingles  his own funds with the principal's  funds or with the funds that he manages, he may not then purchase, for his own account  any assets from the  assets owned by the co-mingled  funds without giving notice on each occasion. This is to establish the transfer of ownership and liability for the asset from the co-mingled funds to the agent's account. This requirement is impracticable  in relation to investment  accounts (and therefore this requirement  may be waived). [see items 7/1/2 and 7/1/3]

See also Shari'ah Standard No. (23) on Agency and the Acts of an Un•
commissioned Agent (Fodooli).

12. Contemporary  Applications  of Investment Agency

12/1  Co-mingling the funds ofan unrestricted agency with Mudarabah funds or with the agent's funds.

12/1/1  It is permissible to co-mingle funds on the basis ofInvestment Agency with funds from Mudarabah  investment accounts. Such funds are treated as if they were extra funds provided by a capital provider in a Mudarabah investment or shareholder funds when they are co-mingled with funds in Mudarabah investment  accounts.  Allocation  of profits  is  calculated by the standard prorated  method  (usually daily weighted



1124





Sharf'ah Standard No (46): AI-Wakalah Bi Al-lstithmar (Investment Agency)

average method)  for funds invested in Mudarabah which takes into account  each investor's amount  and the tenor of the  investment.  All the profits  of the  invested  funds in Murabahah  belong to the principals  and the  agent is entitled to his fee and any performance incentive stipulated The agent is not entitled to any profits generated from the Mudarabah accounts he invested.

12/2  Investment agency for the financing ofworking capital Investment  agency can be used as a substitute for an overdraft. The amount provided to the client is regarded as the institution's
undivided share in the working capital ofthe client. It is permissible
for the client to use the withdrawn  amount  to settle the client's liabilities relating to his activities or his employees' salaries. The client is entitled to a fee for his service and profit from his portion ofthe working capital and losses occurring after the agency, if any, are borne by both parties on a pro-rata basis. If the client has any interest-bearing deposits or loans, the institution should stipulate that the client is solely responsible for them.
When  the client does not require financing  anymore, then  the relationship may be terminated on the basis of Takharuj  which means that either the joint account is distributed  between them pro-rata or one party will purchase the share ofthe other at a price agreed upon at that time.

12/3  Appointing conventional banksbythe institutions as their investment agents and vice versa

12/3/1 It is permissible for institutions to appoint a conventional bank as an investment agent, provided that the relevant con• tracts are compliant with Sharf'ah approved by the institu• tion's Shari'ah Supervisory Board, and that the conventional banks have among their activities Shari'ah-compliant modes offinancing and investment with proper Shari'ah supervision

(2) As an alternative to an overdraft, its application requires precise accounting treatment



1125





Sharf' ah  Stan dard  No  (46 ):  AI -Wakal ah  Bi Al -lstithm ar  (Inves tm ent Agency)

and Shari'ah audit without violating the requirements of the regulatory authorities.

12/3/2  It is permissible for the institution to accept funds based on Wakalah from conventional banks and invest them in its ac• tivities which have been approved by its Sharf'ah Supervisory Board, provided that the contract is free from conditions and restrictions that are prohibited by the Shari'ah.

12/4 Expiry of the investment agency term before collecting amounts receivable
If the agency expires and the receivables are yet to be collected, and the agency is not mutually renewed, the investment agent is required to collect the receivables and take necessary actions against the debtors or other counter-parties delaying their payments.
The agent is not entitled to any fee for such collection unless agreed otherwise. It is not permissible for the agent to use such funds received for his personal use or to re-invest them. The agent is not required to pay to the principal such receivables from his own personal funds, or to seek financing like Tawarruq for this purpose.

12/5 In the event of early termination  of the agency either by mutual agreement, or by one party  unilaterally exercising its right to terminate  or by early settlement of the amounts due (from the obligors), it is permissible (if mutually agreed upon) to reduce the performance  incentive stipulated for the agent, if any, in proportion to the tenor of the investment.

13. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 26 Jumada II, 1432 A.H., corresponding to
29 May2011 A.D.











1126





Sharf' ah  Stan dard  No  (46 ):  AI -Wakal ah  Bi Al -lstithm ar  (Inves tm ent Agency)





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted this  Standard in its 30th meeting held in the Kingdom of Bahrain during the period of 24-26 Jumada II, 1432 A.H., corresponding to 27-29 May 2011 A.D.












































1127





Sharf' ah  Stan dard  No  (46 ):  AI -Wakal ah  Bi Al -lstithm ar  (Inves tm ent Agency)





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 23 Muharram  1430 A.H., corresponding to 20 January 2009 A.D., the General Secretariat decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Investment Agency.

In its meeting held in Kuwait, on 6 Rabi' I, 1431 A.H., corresponding to
20 February 2010 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards  Committee discussed the draft of a Shari'ah Standard on Investment Agency and made necessary amendments.
The revised draft of the Shari'ah Standard was presented to the Sharf'ah Board in its 28th meeting held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, during the period of 12-14 Dhul-Qa'dah 1431 A.H., corresponding to 20-22 October
2010 A.D. The amendments that were deemed appropriate were included

The revised draft of the Sharf'ah Standard was presented to the Shari'ah Board in its 29th meeting held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, during the period of 28-30 Rabi' I, 1432 A.H., corresponding to 3-5 March 2010 A.D. The amendments that were deemed appropriate were included.

The General Secretariat held a public hearing in the Kingdom ofBahrain, on 25 Jumada II, 1432 A.H., corresponding to 28 May 2011 A.D. All the comments made in the public hearing were listened to, and a representative ofthe Shari'ah Board answered these comments and made commentary on them.

In its meeting No. (30) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, during the period of 24-26 Jumada II, 1432 A.H., corresponding to 27-29 May 2011
A.D.,  the  Shari'ah  Board discussed the  amendments  proposed  by the
participants in the public hearing and incorporated the amendments that it deemed appropriate, and adopted the Standard.



1128





Sharf' ah  Stan dard  No  (46 ):  AI -Wakal ah  Bi Al -lstithm ar  (Inves tm ent Agency)

In its meeting held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah, on 30 Sha'ban 1436
A.H., corresponding to 17 June 2015 A.D., the Sharf'ah Standards Review Committee  reviewed this  Standard.  After  deliberation, the  committee approved necessary amendments, and the Standard was adopted  in its current amended version.

















































1129





Sharf'ah Standard No (46): AI-Wakalah Bi Al-lstithmar (Investment Agency)





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


The basis for the differentiating between investment agency and agency in general is that the former is in order to increase wealth, and it is similar to Mudarabah and Musharakah in this respect However, the difference between investment  agency and Mudarabah  and Musharakah  is that Investment Agency is a form of ljarah  (hiring), while Mudarabah  and Musharakah are forms of partnership.  As for the general agency,  it is an authorization to perform specific tasks such as payment etc. Even if the authorization  is to engage in a sale/purchase, such as the authorization of the client in a Murabahah  contract, its main purpose  is to acquire ownership for the institution rather than investment on its behalf.
■  The basis for the  permissibility  of investment  agency is the  Hadith
stating:  "Engage in trade with the wealth of orphans so that it will not be consumed by Zakah" as well as numerous Verses of the Qur'an on seeking sustenance, striving and earning.
• The basis for the binding nature of the investment agency is that it is entered into for a specific period; i.e., there is an agreement between the counterparties that neither ofthem can unilaterally dissolve the contract except in certain circumstances specified in the contract.
■  The basis for allocating for the investment agent any profit amount in excess of the expected profit is that it is a type of conditional gift and is an incentive.
• Ifthe agency contract stipulates a certain percentage ofprofit and the agent invests in lower-yielding transactions,  the agent is liable to compensate the principal for the difference between the profit earned and the average

(3) Related by Al-Tabrani  in  i\l-Awsat" and graded  authentic  (sahih)  by AI-'Iraqi. Ibn Hajar graded it as good (hasan).  "Fayd AI-Qadir" [1: 108]. It is found in "Al-Muwatta"" as a statement ofUmar (may Allah be pleased with him).



1130





Sharf'ah Standard No (46): AI-Wakalah Bi Al-lstithmar (Investment Agency)

profit prevalent in the market (if it is less than the stipulated amount/ percentage), because he is in breach of the conditions  of the Agency. However, the agent is not liable for the specified percentage stipulated in the contract ifit is higher than the prevalent market rate, because it will be tantamount to acquiring another's wealth by illegitimate means.
• The basis for the permissibility of employing the agency's funds in the Mudarabah portfolio is that the authorization granted by the investment agency includes such employment when the agency is unrestricted.
■  The basis for the principle that the agent, in a situation where the agency's
funds are employed in a Mudarabah portfolio, is entitled to the agency commission and not to Mudarabah  profit is that his contract with the institution is that of agency and not of Mudarabah. Even if the agent has employed the funds in a Mudarabah portfolio, the profit entitled to the institution  is generated from the Mudarabah  portfolio and not on the basis of agency.





























(4) See "AL-Mughni", vol. 5, (P. 135).



1131























Shari'ah Standard No. (47)



Rules for Calculating  Profit in
Financial Transactions












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface...................................................................................................      1137
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................      1138

1. Scope of the Standard..............................................................................      1138
2. Definition of Profit and Methods of Calculation                                    1138
3. Permissible and Impermissible Profit....................................................      1138
4. Determining the Profit Rate in Transactions........................................      1138
5. Increasing the Profit Rate for Credit Sales over Cash Sales................      1139
6. Determining  Profit in Amounts or Percentages...................................      1139
7.  Setting Different Ratios or Rates for ProfitDistribution in Mudarabah
Financing...................................................................................................      1139
8. Profit Distribution in Sharf'ah-Compliant Deferred Transactions..     1139
9. The Institution Must Disclose Its Method of Profit Calculation.......      1140
10. It Is Permissible to Adopt Shari'ah-Compliant CustomaryAccounting
Practices to Calculate Profit                                                                   1140
11. It Is Permissible for the Institution to Grant Its Client a Rebate for
Early Payment                                                                                         1140
12.  Contractual  Relationship Between the Institution  and Its Client Is
Not Affected by the Method Adopted in Booking Its Profits                 1140
13. Date of Issuance of the Standard.............................................................      1141
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1142
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1143
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard....................................       1144










1135








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to explain the rules and methods of calculation and distribution ofprofits in financing or investment activities ofInstitutions.



































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



1137





Shari'ah Standard No (47): Rules for Calculating Profit in Financial Transactions





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers profit, its validity in Shari'ah and rules and methods of calculating and distributing  it. It also explains who is entitled to profit earned  from the financing  and investment activities of the institutions. This Standard does not cover profit distribution in investment  accounts because that is provided in a separate Standard.

2. Definition of Profit and Methods of Calculation

In the  context  of this Standard, Profit means the amount  generated  in excess of the original capital or of the cost in the operations  of financing and investment activities. Calculation of profit refers to the methods used to determine  the amount of profit in the institution's operations.

3. Permissible and Impermissible  Profit

3/1  Permissible profit is that which results from a permissible transaction such as a sale, lease or partnership, in compliance with Shari'ah rules relating to contracts.

3/2 Impermissible profit is that which results from a prohibited transaction such as interest-based contracts, trade in forbidden commodities and/ or invalid contracts.

4. Determinin g the Profit Rate in Transactions

4/1 There is no upper limit for profits, provided  that the transaction is based on mutual consent, with due consideration  for values of kind• ness, contentment and clemency.

4/2  In principle, it is impermissible for a regulator to cap profits. However, in  monopoly  situations,  extraordinary  circumstances  and  cases of clear public interest, it is permissible to fix the profit rate, provided it is not prejudicial.



1138





Shari'ah Standard No (47): Rules for Calculating Profit in Financial Transactions

5. Increasing the Profit Rate for Credit Sales over Cash Sales

It is permissible to increase the profit in credit sales as compared to cash sales, provided that it is incorporated into the price and that the amount of debt is not increased due to any late payment.

6. Determining Profit in Amounts  or Percentages

6/1 The profit in a Murabahah  contract may be stipulated as a fixed amount added to the cost price, or as a percentage of the cost price.

6/2 It is permissible  to resort to a well-established benchmark/index mutually  agreed  upon  between  the  parties  in  determining the profit during the undertaking stage (Wa'd) or when concluding the transaction. In all cases, the total price, the dates and amounts  of the installments, if any, must be stipulated and must not vary with the movement of the benchmark/index. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (8) on Murabahah, item 4/6]

7. Setting Different Ratios or Rates for Profit Distribution in Mudarabah
Financing

7/1  In Mudarabah financing it is permissible to set different profit ratios or rates as per the different tenors of the Mudarabah. The different rates may also be triggered upon the profit of either party reaching a specified hurdle rate. In all cases, no party to a Mudarabah contract may be totally deprived ofprofit. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (13) on Mudarabah, item 8/5]

7/2 It is permissible for the capital provider to stipulate that the mudarib does not employ the funds in investment activities where the expected profit rate falls below a specific percentage, taking into consideration that it is not permissible to either guarantee the capital, or the profit or both.  [see Shari'ah Standard No. (46) on Investment Agency]

8. Profit Distribution in Shari'ah-Compliant Deferred Transactions

8/1 It is permissible to adopt customary accounting practices that are required by supervisory and/or regulatory bodies for calculating and distributing profit in deferred transactions  across several financial



1139





Shari'ah Standard No (47): Rules for Calculating Profit in Financial Transactions

periods, provided they are in accordance with Shari'ah. Whenever possible, AAOIFTs Accounting Standards shall be adopted in this process.

8/2 When preparing their financial statements, institutions must avoid any methods ofprofit calculation or distribution that are misleading or deceptive.

9.   The  Institution  Must  Disclose  Its  Method  of Profit  Calculation and allow its clients to inquire about such methods. Likewise, it must disclose such methods when mentioning profit in its advertising campaigns and product  marketing brochures in order to prevent any deception. In contracts, Institution must disclose the total price or the cost price and the profit,  either as a lump sum or as a percentage of the cost price. Where profit rate is time-bound, it is impermissible to re-schedule debt obligations through increasing the profit and/or total amount by extending the duration.

10. It Is Permissible to Adopt Shari'ah-Ccompliant Customary Accounting Practices to Calculate Profit based on the length ofthe financing period such as a calculation method that determines profit for the entire period on the basis of an annualised percentage ofthe total amount of financing provided or a calculation method that determines profit on the basis ofan annualised percentage of the amount of financing outstanding according to an amortised payment schedule, provided that it does so transparently and with full disclosure and that the total sale price is stated as a fixed amount.

11. It Is Permissible  for the Institution  to Grant Its Client  a Rebate for Early Payment provided that this rebate was not stipulated in the contract, taking into consideration regulatory directives.

12. Contractual Relationship Between the Institution and Its Client Is Not Affected by the Method Adopted in Booking Its Profits in its internal records, as in separating the profit account from the expense account Institutions should regularly upgrade their systems and computer software in order to be consistent with Sharf'ah standards and rulings.



1140





Shari'ah Standard No (47): Rules for Calculating Profit in Financial Transactions

13. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 26 Jumada II, 1432 A.H., corresponding to
29 May 2011 A.D.




















































1141





Shari'ah Standard No (47): Rules for Calculating Profit in Financial Transactions





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted this Standard in its meeting No. (30) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain during the period of 24-26 Jumada II, 1432 A.H., corresponding to 27-29 May 2011 A.D.












































1142





Shari'ah Standard No (47): Rules for Calculating Profit in Financial Transactions





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On  14 Rabi' I,  1429 A.H., corresponding  to 20 April 2008 A.D., the General Secretariat decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Calculating Profit in Financial Transactions.

In its meeting held in Kuwait, on 24 Ramadan 1431 A.H., corresponding to 28 January 2010 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee discussed the draft ofa Shari'ah Standard on Calculating Profit in Financial Transactions and made necessary amendments.

The revised draft ofthe Shari'ah Standard was presented to the Sharf'ah Board in its 28th meeting held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, during the period of 12-14 Dhul-Qa'dah 1431 A.H., corresponding to 20-22 October
2010 A.D. The amendments that were deemed appropriate were included

The General Secretariat held a public hearing in the Kingdom ofBahrain, on 25 Jumada II, 1432 A.H., corresponding to 28 May 2011 A.D. All the com• ments made in the public hearing were listened to, and a representative ofthe Sharf'ah Board answered these comments and made commentary on them.

In its meeting No. (30) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, during the period of 24-26 Jumada II, 1432 A.H., corresponding to 27-29 May 2011
A.D.,  the  Shari'ah Board  discussed  the  amendments  proposed  by the participants in the public hearing and incorporated  the amendments that it deemed appropriate, and adopted the Standard

In its meeting held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah, on 30 Sha'ban 1436
A.H., corresponding to 17 June 2015 A.D., the Sharf'ah Standards Review Committee  reviewed this  Standard.  After  deliberation,  the  committee approved necessary amendments, and the Standard was adopted  in its current amended version.



1143





Shari'ah Standard No (47): Rules for Calculating  Profit in Financial Transactions





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


The basis for not stipulating a maximum profit limit is the Quranic Verse:
{"..except it be a trade amongstyou, by mutual consent}• This ruling is also confirmed by Resolution No. (46) 5/8 of the Islamic Fiqh Acad• emy, which states: "There is no fixed specific profit rate that traders are bound by"
■  The basis for the permissibility of increased profit/price  in a deferred/
credit sale is the Quranic Verse:  {"Allah has permitted sale"}as refer•
ring to the deferred sale in order for the comparison between it and in• terest, which also involves an increase, to be valid. Accounting Standard No. (20) has been issued on deferred sales.
The basis for the permissibility of using different  rates in Mudarabah transactions is because such a provision does not disrupt the sharing of profits by all parties.





















(2) [Al-Nisa'  (The Women): 29].
(3) [AI-Baqarah (The Cow): 275]



1144





















Shari'ah Standard No. (48)



Options to Terminate Due to Breach of Trust (Trust-Based Options)












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                           1149
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................      1150

1. Scope of the Standard..............................................................................      1150
2. Khiyar Al-Taghrir (Option to Revoke on Grounds of Deception).....      1150
3. Khiyar Al-Tadlis (Option to Revoke on Grounds of Deceptive Con-
duct)                                                                                                                    1151
4.  Khiyar Al-Ghabn (Option to Revoke on Grounds of Price Gouging)...      1152
5. Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................      1154
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1155
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1156
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard....................................      1158



























1147








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard covers the rules relating to options of buyers to revoke contracts where such options exist by operation ofa Sharf'ah rule as opposed to stipulation of the parties and which arise from the seller deceiving the buyer by statement or action or grossly overcharging him.  It also covers the  applications  of such options  to revoke in the activities of financial institutions.




























(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



1149





Sharf'ah Standard No (48): Options to Terminate Due to Breach of Trust Trust-Based Options





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers the rules relating to options of buyers to revoke contracts that arise immediately upon the seller deceiving the buyer by statement or conduct or grossly overcharging him in specific circumstances. It does not cover Khiyarat al-Tarawwi (options to reconsider) or Khiyarat al-Salamah (options to revoke due to incomplete performance) as they have separate Shari'ah Standards dedicated to them.

2. Khiyar Al- Taghrir (Option to Revoke on Grounds of Deception)

2/1  Definition  of Khiyar al-Taghrir

The option to revoke on grounds of verbal deception is the right of a buyer to revoke a contract  due to deception by the seller or a colluding party, inaccurately describing the sale item so that the buyer purchases it at a price higher than the market price.

2/2 Exam ples of verbal deception  (Taghrir)

a) Deliberate misinformation regarding the original cost price or expense incurred  in a Murabahah  (markup),  Tawliyah  (sale at cost) or Hatitah (sale below cost) sale.  [see Shari'ah Standard No. (8) on Murabahah]

b) Increasing the bid in an auction sale phantom bidding which is known as Munajashah or Najsh.

c) Inaccurate statements to mislead the buyer into thinking that the sale item meets his requirements, or falsely claiming that it is no longer available elsewhere in the market

d) Deceptively inaccurate announcements  about a company's per•
formance in order to entice the public to buy its shares.



1150





Sharf'ah Standard No (48): Options to Terminate Due to Breach of Trust Trust-Based Options

2/3 Causes

2/3/1 The buyer has the option to revoke the contract in the event of being verbally deceived.

2/3/2 The buyer  may return  the item within  a period  customarily acceptable for revocation.

2/4 Lapse of the option

2/4/1  The option to revoke on grounds ofverbal deception lapses ifthe item is destroyed or consumed by the buyer before the deception is discovered, or if an impediment arises preventing return, or if the buyer fails to return it despite being able to do so.

2/4/2 If this option lapses, the sell is entitled to the full price of the item and the buyer is not entitled to any refund.

2/4/3 The seller is liable for expenses relating to the return ofthe item
to the place of sale.

2/5  Transfer of the option

Khiyar al- Taghrir does not transfer to the heirs of its holder upon death of the owner.

3. Khiyar Al-Tadlis (Option to Revoke on Grounds of Deceptive Conduct)

3/1  Definition

Khiyar al-Tadlis is the option ofa buyer to revoke a contract on grounds of deceptive conduct by the seller or a colluding party. Such conduct would be to portray the sale item different than  its actual condition, inducing the buyer to think that it is in a better condition.

3/2 Prerequisites

3/2/1  The  deception  must  result  from  the  seller's conduct  or  in• structions.  If caused by something  that is beyond  the seller's control or by unforeseen  circumstances,  the option is invalid

3/2/2  The buyer must be unaware of the deception.



1151





Sharf'ah Standard No (48): Options to Terminate Due to Breach of Trust Trust-Based Options

3/2/3  The deception must be continuing. If the seller engages in a deceptive conduct but the sale item's condition eventually im• proves (to a condition not less than the original specification) before the contract is revoked, the buyer has no right ofrevo• cation.

3/3  Examples of deceptive conduct

3/3/1   False branding of products using counterfeit labels to promote sales.

3/3/2  Painting an old car to hide its age and give the impression that itis new.

3/3/3  Adding lubricants  or other  substances so that  the product appears in a better condition.

3/4 Causes of Khiyar al-Tadlis

3/4/1 A buyer who is enticed by deceptive conduct may return the sale item or retain it.

3/4/2 The buyer may return  the item within a period  customarily acceptable for return.

3/4/3 The buyer is not  entitled to compensation  if he decides to retain the sale item.

3/5  Lapse of the option

The option to revoke on grounds of deceptive conduct lapses if the item is destroyed or consumed by the buyer after the deception is discovered, or ifthe buyer fails to return it despite being able to do so.

3/6 Transfer of the option

Khiyar al-Tadlis does not transfer upon death to the heirs ofits owner.

4. Khiyar Al-Ghabn (Option to Revoke on Grounds of Price Gouging)

4/1 Definition

Khiyar al-Ghabn is a buyer's right to revoke a contract or accept it if it is discovered that the price paid exceeds the highest estimate given by experts in the market. The price gouging that triggers this



1152





Sharf'ah Standard No (48): Options to Terminate Due to Breach of Trust Trust-Based Options

option is that which, according to the opinion of certified valuators, is deemed excessive in commercial custom.

4/2 Prerequisite

The buyer must be unaware ofprice gouging at the inception of the contract.

4/3 Examples of price gouging

4/3/1  Sale to a Mustarsil; i.e., a purchaser who does not negotiate the price because he trusts the seller not to overcharge him.

4/3/2  Collusion  between  brokers  and  sellers that  leads to  price spikes or increases of prices above fair market levels.

4/3/3  Exploiting the ignorance of exporters using deceptive state• ments in order to purchase items from them at a price lower than the prevalent price in the importer's country.

4/3/4 Acting as an intermediary  between sellers and other market participants in order to sell items in the market for more than the prevalent price.
4/4 Causes of Khiyar al-Ghabn

4/4/1 The party deceived by price gouging has the right to revoke the contract; he may also accept it without recourse to refund.

4/4/2 Ifthe partydeceived byprice gouging accepts the contract, then he is not entitled to seek any compensation. It is permissible for the two parties (the party deceived by price gouging and the seller) to mutually agree upon an indemnification amount instead of revocation.
4/5 Khiyar al-Ghabn lapses in the following situations

a) Destruction or consumption ofthe sale item or the occurrence of any change or defect in it. The attachment  of a third-party right over the sale item has the same legal effect as its consumption.

b) Inaction of the buyer during the period enabling him to revoke, and after discovering price gouging in the sale item.



1153





Sharf'ah Standard No (48): Options to Terminate Due to Breach of Trust Trust-Based Options

c) Any disposal of the sale item, by the buyer, after discovering price gouging.
4/6  Transfer of the option

Khiyar al-Ghabn does not transfer upon death to the heirs ofits owner.

5. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 26 Jumada II, 1432 A.H., corresponding to
29 May 2011 A.D.












































1154





Sharf'ah Standard No (48): Options to Terminate Due to Breach of Trust Trust-Based Options





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted the Standard on Trust-Based Options in its meeting No. (30) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain during the period of24-26
Jumada II, 1432 A.H., corresponding to 27-29 May 2011 A.D.













































1155





Sharf'ah Standard No (48): Options to Terminate Due to Breach of Trust Trust-Based Options





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 18 Jumada II,  1431  A.H., corresponding to 2 April 2010 A.D., the General Secretariat decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Trust-Based Options.

In its meeting held in Dubai, on 24 Ramadan 1431 A.H., corresponding to 3 September  2010 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee discussed the draft of a Shari'ah Standard on Trust-Based Options and made necessary amendments.

The revised draft of the Shari'ah Standard was presented to the Sharf'ah Board in its meeting No. (29) held in the Makkah Al-Mukarramah, during the period of 28-30 Rabi' I, 1432 A.H., corresponding to 3-5 March 2010
A.D. The amendments that were deemed appropriate were included.

The  General Secretariat held a public hearing  in the  Kingdom of Bahrain on 25 Jumada II, 1432 A.H., corresponding to 28 May 2011 A.D. The public hearing was attended by a number of representatives from central banks, institutions, accounting firms, Sharf'ah scholars, academics and others interested in this field. All the comments made in the public hearing were listened to,  and; the members of the Shari'ah Standards Committee then answered or commented on them and decided to accept some of them.

In its meeting No. (3)  held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, during the period of 24-26 Jumada II, 1432 A.H., corresponding to 27-29 May 2011
A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed the draft ofthe Standard, incorporated
the necessary amendments that it deemed appropriate, and adopted the
Standard.



1156





Sharf'ah Standard No (48): Options to Terminate Due to Breach of Trust Trust-Based Options

In its meeting held in the United Arab Emirates,  on 7 Sha'ban  1436
A.H., corresponding to 25 May 2015 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Review Committee  reviewed this  Standard.  After deliberation,  the  committee approved necessary amendments, and the Standard was adopted in its current amended version.

















































1157





Sharf'ah Standard No (48): Options to Terminate Due to Breach of Trust Trust-Based Options





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


■  Options to revoke sales on grounds ofbreach oftrust are either permissi•
ble in Shari'ah by default or by stipulation in the contract.
■  The basis for permissibility is that sale contracts should by default be free from defect.
• If then it is discovered that this was not the case and there was deception, verbally or by conduct or there was price gouging, the buyer has the right to revoke the contract.
■  The basis for the permissibility for the option to revoke on the grounds of
verbal deception because it contradicts the basic pillar of valid contracts in Shari'ah, which is mutual consent. That is because, without the verbal deception, the buyer would not have proceeded with the purchase. The same basis applies for deceptive conduct being a ground for revocation.
■  The basis for the permissibility of revoking contracts on the grounds of
price gouging with a trusting  buyer is the Hadith  stating:  "Overcharg• ing a trusting buyer (Mustarsil) isforbidden". A variant narration  states: "Overcharging a trusting buyer is Riba (usury)".
■  The basis for the lapsing of the option to revoke due to the disposal of the sale item by the buyer after having discovered the deception, verbally or by conduct, is that this disposal is equivalent to an explicit consent to waive this option.










(2) Related by Al-Tabarani (H: 3410)
(3) Related by AI-Bayhaqi (H:  10924 and 10925)



1158

























Shari'ah Standard No. (49)



Unilateral and Bilateral Promise












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                           1163
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................      1164

1. Scope of the Standard..............................................................................      1164
2. Definitions of Unilateral and Bilateral Promises.................................      1164
3. Types of Promises and the Shari'ah Rules Applicable to Them .........      1164
4. Types of Bilateral Promise and the Rules Applicable to Them...........      1166
5. Permissible Applications of Promises and Bilateral Promises............      1168
6. Impermissible Applications.....................................................................      1168
7. Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................      1168
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1169
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1170
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard....................................      1172
Appendix (c):  Definitions.............................................................................      1173























1161








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to explain the concepts ofunilateral promise/under• taking  (promise) and bilateral promise/undertaking (bilateral promise); their various types and the enforceability of each type; the Sharf'ah rules that govern them and the most important  contemporary  applications of each type in the activities oflslamic financial institutions.






























(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



1163





Shar f'ah  Stan dar d N o.  (49): Unila teral  an d Bilateral Promis e





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers promises (unilateral and bilateral) given by certain parties for the purpose of concluding a contract or effecting a disposal, and explains when such instruments  are binding  and when they are not, the jurisprudential rules that govern them, and the most important contemporary  applications  of each type  in  the  activities of Islamic financial institutions.

2. Definitions of Unilateral and Bilateral Promises

2/1  For the purpose ofthis Standard, a unilateral promise is given when a party informs another  of its resolute intention  (undertaking) to act in the future in the interest of the other, with the other having the option to avail itself of the promise. The party undertaking the promise is called the 'promisor', the party receiving the promise is called the 'promisee' (the beneficiary ofthe promise) and the action is called the 'promised action'.

2/2  Bilateral promise in this Standard refers to the exchange oftwo back• to-back promises between two parties, each promising to perform an act in the future relating to the same subject matter.

3. Types of Promises and the Shari'ah Rules Applicable to Them

3/1  Promising to perform an act that impermissible by the Shari'ah is prohibited, and fulfilling such a promise is also prohibited. Examples of such promises are those intended to be a ruse to circumvent the prohibition of interest-bearing (Riha) transactions.

3/2 Any promise in a loan contract that procures benefit for the lender, over and  above the repayment  of the debt, is  prohibited  by the Shari'ah even if the promise is granted in a document separate from the loan contract.



1164





Shar f'ah  Stan dar d N o.  (49): Unila teral  an d Bilateral Promis e

3/3 Any promise in a sale contract made by the buyer or the seller that results in a repurchase contract ('Inah) is prohibited by the Sharf'ah, whether the promise is part of the sale contract or is given prior or subsequent to it, such as purchasing an item on credit and promising to sell it back on spot for a lower price or selling an item on credit and promising to buy it back on spot for a lower price (reverse 'Inah). The same prohibition applies ifthe parties collude with a third party to act as an intermediary in the repurchase.

3/4 It is permissible to promise to perform an action or a financial trans• action and it is then a religious obligation to fulfill it, meaning that breaking a promise without an excuse is a sin. However, a promise is not legally binding except when there is a real need for it to be enforced, such as when the promisor causes the promisee to incur a liability as a result ofthe promise. For example, ifa person instructs a merchant to purchase a specific item and then resolutely promises the merchant that he will buy this item from him. If the merchant purchases the item solely in reliance on the promise, the promisor is legally bound to purchase the item from him, failing which the promisor  is required to indemnify the promisee (merchant/seller) for any actual loss suffered such that if the merchant  is unable to sell the item for a price that covers the cost ofthe item, the promisor is required to make up the difference between the cost of the item and the price obtained by the merchant for it. Actual loss does not include opportunity cost.

3/5  A legally binding promise, as explained in item 3/4 above, is enforceable only against the promisor and is not enforceable against the promisee who has the option either to demand performance from the promisor or to waive it.

3/6  Fulfilling a benevolent promise (such as a promise to make a gift or lend an item) is a religious obligation but is not binding legally, except if the promise is conditional upon the promisee performing an action that causes the promisee to incur a liability, in which case it is legally binding.  For example, if the promisor says to the promisee:  "If you



1165





Shar f'ah  Stan dar d N o.  (49): Unila teral  an d Bilateral Promis e

buy this item from me, I will give you a gift of another specified item", fulfilling such a promise is a religious obligation and is legally binding.

3/7 It is permissible for a party  to promise to enter into a commutative contract in the future and for the promisee to promise the first party to enter into a separate commutative contract with a different  subject matter from that of the first promise. For example, the first party says, "I promise to sell you this item,  and the other party says,  "I promise to lease to you such and such property, neither  of the two promises is legally binding  except if a promisor  causes a promisee  to incur a liability, in which case such promise is binding.  [see item 3/5]

3/8 When  a promise  is made to enter into a contract  in the future, such contract  is not effected automatically. The contract  must be entered into  at the  relevant  time  by the  exchange  of offer  and  acceptance. Where  the  promise  is legally binding,  if the  offer  is made  by the promisee,  the  promisor  is bound  religiously  and  legally to  accept it. And  if the offer  is made  by the promisor,  the promisee  has the option to accept or reject it.

4. Types of Bilateral Promise and the Rules Applicable to Them

4/1  A bilateral promise to perform an act that is prohibited by the Shari'ah is itself prohibited such as a bilateral promise to enter into one or more contracts with the intention to circumvent the prohibition  of interest (Riha);  e.g.,  a bilateral promise  to enter  into  a sale and  repurchase ('Inah) contract and a bilateral promise to enter into a sale and a loan.

4/2  Fulfillin g a bilateral promise to perform an act that is permitted but not binding under the Sharf'ah is a religious obligation on both parties but is not legally binding except in situations where an actual commercial transaction  is not possible without a binding bilateral promise owing either to legal requirements or to general commercial custom, and the objective is not merely to provide financing, such as:

4/2/1   Bilateral promises in international trade conducted  by means of documentary credits.

4/2/2  Bilateral promises in supply agreements.



1166





Shar f'ah  Stan dar d N o.  (49): Unila teral  an d Bilateral Promis e

4/3 The binding bilateral promises referred to in item 4/2 are not future contracts, which means that the promised contract is not effected automatically  upon  the  promised  date.  The  contract  must  be entered into at the relevant time by exchanging notices of offer and acceptance.  Since the bilateral promise is binding on both parties, if any party makes an offer, the other party is religiously and legally bound by it. If one party defaults in fulfilling the promise, the other party  can obtain a court  injunction  requiring  them  to conclude the contract. If it is not possible to conclude the contract and the promisee needs to mitigate his loss by concluding the same contract with a third party but is not able to recover his cost by means of such contract, the defaulting party is liable to indemnify him for actual loss suffered (not to include opportunity cost) if the price obtained under the new contract (with the third party) is lower than price promised by the defaulting party.

4/4 It is permissible for the two parties to enter into a master agreement for future transactions  where each party has the  option whether or not to enter into the future transaction.  If the parties enter into a transaction, then the terms and conditions agreed in the general framework  (master  agreement)  apply.  An agreement  containing a general framework (a master agreement) is a bilateral promise that does not bind any of the parties to enter into those transactions. For example, an institution and a client wishing to enter into Murabahah transactions  can  agree on  a  general  framework  which  explains the transaction  process and the terms  and conditions.  A general framework (a master agreement) is not considered to be a concluded transaction and the client is not required upon signing the framework to enter into a Murabahah contract. Rather, each party has an option. When the parties enter into the Murabahah contract by exchanging notices ofoffer and acceptance, the contract becomes subject to all the terms and conditions agreed upon in the general framework (master agreement) which are expressly reconfirmed and incorporated  in every contract. [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (37) on Credit Agreement]



1167





Shar f'ah  Stan dar d N o.  (49): Unila teral  an d Bilateral Promis e

5. Permissible Applications  of Promises and Bilateral Promises

5/1 The promise  given by the  client in the Murabahah  transactions conducted by institutions is legally binding by virtue of item 3/5 of this Standard. [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (8) on Murabahah]

5/2 The promise given by the institution in Ijarah Muntahia Bittamleek transactions to grant the leased asset to the lessee as a gift conditional on that he pays all the lease installments is legally binding as in item
3/6 of this Standard.  [see Shari'ah Standard (9) on Ijarah Muntahia
Bittamleek]

The promise given by the institution  in diminishing  Musharakah transactions  that it will lease its share of the asset to the other co• owner is legally binding and the promise given by the client that he will buy units of the institution's share at stipulated intervals are legally binding by virtue of item 3/5 of this Standard.  [see para 5 of Sharf'ah Standard No. (12) on Sharikah (Musharakah) and Modern Corporations]

6. Impermissible Applications

It is impermissible  to  enter  into back-to-back  bilateral promises  for the purpose  of circumventing  the prohibition  by Shari'ah of certain transactions,  such as back-to-back derivatives as in items 3/1  and 3/7 of this Standard.  [see para 5 of Shari'ah  Standard No.  (20) on Sale of Commodities in Organized Markets]

7. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Standard was issued on 21 Safar 1434 A.H., corresponding to 4 January
2013A.D.














1168





Shar f'ah  Stan dar d N o.  (49): Unila teral  an d Bilateral Promis e





Adoption of the Standard


The Sharf'ah Board adopted the Standard on Unilateral and Bilateral Promise in its meeting No. (34), held in the Kingdom ofBahrain, during the period of 20-21 Safar 1434 A.H., corresponding to 3-4 January 2013 A.D.













































1169





Shar f'ah  Stan dar d N o.  (49): Unila teral  an d Bilateral Promis e





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 14 Jumada II, 1430 A.H., corresponding to 7 June 2009 A.D., the General Secretariat decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Unilateral and Bilateral Promise.

In a joint meeting held in the Kingdom ofBahrain, on 18 Safar 1428 A.H., corresponding to 8 March 2007 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards committees (1) and (2) discussed the study, approved it and required the consultant to prepare the exposure draft ofthe Standard.

In a further joint meeting held in Manama, the Kingdom of Bahrain, on
15 Jumada I, 1428 A.H., corresponding to 31 May 2007 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards  Committees  (1)  and  (2)  discussed the draft of the Standard and necessary amendments were made in the light of the discussions and observations ofthe meeting.

In its meeting No. (19) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, during the period of26-30 Sha'ban 1428 A.H., corresponding to 8-12 September 2007
A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the draft ofthis Standard and made the amendments which it deemed necessary.

The General Secretariat held a public hearing in the Kingdom ofBahrain on 8 Jumada II, 1429 A.H., corresponding to 12 June 2008 A.D. The public hearing was attended by a number of representatives from central banks, institutions,  accounting  firms, Shari'ah scholars, academics and  others interested in this field. The members ofthe Sharf'ah Standards Committees (1) and (2) duly responded to several comments and observations that were made in the public hearing.

In its meeting No.  (21) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah,  during the period of21-48 Jumada II, 1429 A.H., corresponding to 28 June -2 July



1170





Shar f'ah  Stan dar d N o.  (49): Unila teral  an d Bilateral Promis e

2008 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the amendments proposed by the participants in the public hearing and incorporated the amendments that it considered suitable.

In its meeting No.  (25) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain,  during the period of2-4 Dhul-Qadah 1430 A.H., corresponding to 21-23 October 2009
A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the draft of the Standard, incorporated the necessary amendments that it deemed appropriate, and adopted the Standard.












































1171





Shar f'ah  Stan dar d N o.  (49): Unila teral  an d Bilateral Promis e





Appendix  (B)

The Shari'ah Basis for the standard


The International Islamic Fiqh Academy resolved: "In situations where a sale contract cannot be concluded because the seller does not own the commodity and there is a public interest in obligating both parties to sign a contract in the future by virtue oflaw or otherwise, or according to inter• national norms and customs, as in the case of opening letters of credit for importing goods, bilateral promise can be made binding to the two parties': [Resolution No. (157) 6/17 on Bilateral Promise and Collusion in Contracts (Islamic Fiqh Academy Magazine), Issue No. (17), Vol. 3, (P. 681)]


































1172





Shar f'ah  Stan dar d N o.  (49): Unila teral  an d Bilateral Promis e





Appendix  (C) Definitions


General Framework (Master Agreement)

An agreement  representing  mutual understanding and the exchange of non-binding bilateral promises to enter into transactions.










































1173

























Shari'ah Standard No. (50)




Irrigation Partnership
(Musaqat)












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface                                                                                                           1179
Statement ofthe Standard.....................................................................      1180

1. Scope of the Standard..............................................................................      1180
2. Definition of Irrigation Partnership  (Musaqat)....................................      1180
3. Permissibility and Description of the Contract...................................      1180
4. Elements of Irrigation Partnership.........................................................      1180
5. Conditions of Validity (Prerequisites)...................................................      1180
6. Duties of the Worker (Irrigator).............................................................      1181
7. Duties ofthe Owner of the Trees............................................................      1181
8. Joint Duties of the Worker (Irrigator) and the Owner of Trees              1181
9. Division of Produce..................................................................................      1183
10. Contingencies in Irrigation Partnerships............................................      1183
11. Trees Belonging to Third Parties and Usurped Trees.........................      1183
12. Termination  of Irrigation Partnership Contract (Musaqat)                  1184
13. Revocation of Irrigation Partnership Contract (Musaqat)................      1184
14. Zakah Due on Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat)                                  1185
15. Some Applications ofIrrigation Partnership (Musaqat) in Financial
Institutions.................................................................................................      1185
16. Date of issuance ofthe standard...........................................................      1185
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1186
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1187
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard..............................            1189








1177








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to explain the Shari'ah rules and requirements  for Irrigation Partnership  (Musaqat) and its applications in the activities of Islamic financial Institutions.

































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



1179





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (50): Irrigation Partn ership  (Musaqat)





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers the Shari'ah rules and requirements for Irrigation Partnership  (Musaqat) and its applications  in the activities of Islamic financial institutions. It does not cover other forms of agricultural part• nership as they have separate Shari'ah standards dedicated to them.

2. Definition of Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat)

A contract between the owner ofan orchard or its usufruct and a worker (irrigator)  agreeing to share the produce  according to specific ratios stipulated at the time of contract.

3. Permissibility  and Description  of the Contract

Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat) is a permissible contract that becomes binding on commencement of the work or if mutually agreed between the two parties not to terminate the contract before its expiry.

4. Elements of Irrigation Partnership

4/1  Offer and acceptance should be exchanged explicitly or implicitly by means of a recognised form of indication.

4/2 Each of the two parties should be legally competent.

4/3 The relevant trees should be identified, arable (productive), and in need of irrigation and plant husbandry.

5. Conditions  of Validity (Prerequisites)

5/1  The contract should stipulate for each party a predetermined, defined, indivisible share ofthe produce.

5/2  The work should be restricted to the husbandry ofthe crop and trees.
The owner may not (in this contract) demand any additional work from the worker (irrigator).



1180





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (50): Irrigation Partn ership  (Musaqat)

5/3 The contract is valid until the time ofharvest or for a defined period in which the crop is normally enough for harvest.

6. Duties of the Worker (Irrigator)

6/1  The worker (irrigator)  is obligated to care for the trees and crops as per agreement with the owner and customary requirements, in• cluding:

6/1/1  Carrying out plant husbandry by watering, pollinating, fertil• ising, weeding, maintaining and cleaning irrigation channels, pruning, controlling pests, harvesting and performing season• al work that is usually required for each type of tree.

6/1/2 Not commissioning or subcontracting  a third party to carry out his work without the permission of the owner. If he does so, the owner of the trees has the option to ratify the third party contract or reject it.

6/2 The worker (irrigator) may employ others to assist him to carry out part or all of the contracted work.

6/3 The worker (irrigator) acts in a fiduciary capacity and is not liable for any loss arising from other than wilful misconduct, negligence or breach of the terms of the contract. In such a case, he is liable to indemnify the owner against any actual loss caused, but remains entitled to his share of the crop.

7. Duties of the Owner of the Trees

The owner should facilitate for the worker (irrigator) full access to the trees (subject ofcontract), and remove any impediments which may hinder the work ofthe worker (irrigator).

8. Joint Duties of the Worker (Irrigator) and the Owner of Trees

8/1  After harvesting, the worker (irrigator) and the owner are obligated to take care of the crop, each in proportion  to his share. Prior to harvesting, the worker (irrigator) is obligated to take care ofthe crop unless custom or a term of the contract dictates otherwise.



1181





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (50): Irrigation Partn ership  (Musaqat)

8/2  The worker (irrigator) and the owner are responsible for the expenses of the Irrigation Partnership in proportion to their shares, including any Takaful insurance, unless they agree otherwise.

8/3  The worker (irrigator) is solely responsible for performing the work customarily undertaken  by workers (irrigators) in similar Irrigation Partnerships  and such work does not entitle him to any increase in his share of the crop as he is already contractually obligated to carry it out. If he hires others to perform his work, their wage is his sole responsibility and should not be taken from the overall crop. The worker  (irrigator)  may hire, on the account of the Irrigation Partnership, others to perform work that is customarily beyond the scope of his duties.

8/4 If the worker  (irrigator)  refuses to complete the term  of the Irri• gation  Partnership  after commencing  work or entering  into the contract, the owner should demand performance from him. If the worker  (irrigator)  stops working before the crop materializes  he is not entitled to any share. If he stops working after the crop ma• terializes but before it is ready for harvest, a third party should be hired to complete the work and his wage should be deducted from the worker's (irrigator's) share after the crop is harvested and sold If the worker's (irrigator's)  share is not sufficient to pay the third party's wage, the worker  (irrigator)  must make up the difference. If the worker's (irrigator's) share of the crop is more than the third party's wage, he keeps the difference.

8/5  In an Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat) that is due to terminate when the crop materializes or is ready for harvest, if the owner does not enable the worker, and this occurs before the crop materializes, then the owner shall be requested to enable the worker (irrigator) to com• plete his work. If the owner does not enable the worker (irrigator), then the worker (irrigator) shall be entitled to a wage at the market rate for similar work. If this occurs after the crop materializes, the worker (irrigator) is entitled to his stipulated share ofthe crop.



1182





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (50): Irrigation Partn ership  (Musaqat)

9. Division of Produce

9/1  In principle, all recurring produce  of the trees should be shared  as part  of the crop,  such as fruits,  palm  leaves etc.  unless the parties agree to restrict their sharing arrangement to just the fruits.

9/2 The worker (irrigator) is entitled to his share of the crop on an indi•
visible basis as soon as it materializes.

10. Contingencies in Irrigation Partnerships

10/ 1  Ifthe crop does not materialize at all or is completely destroyed by a natural disaster, the worker (irrigator) is not entitled to anything. If the natural  disaster  destroys  only part  of the crop, the parties divide what remains  according  to their stipulated  shares.
10/2  Ifthe crop does not materialize during the stipulated term, the worker (irrigator) has the option either to stop working or to continue his work without a wage until the crop materializes and thereafter takes his share.  If he stops working without a valid excuse, he foregoes his right to a share of the crop when it materializes. If he has a valid excuse, he is entitled to the portion of his share that corresponds to the period of time worked in proportion  to the total time the crop took to materialize.

11. Trees Belonging  to Third Parties and Usurped Trees

11/1  If it transpires  that the trees belong to a third  party, the crop will then  belong  to  him  (the  third  party).  In this  case, the  worker (irrigator) is entitled  to a wage or compensation from the other party  (the usurping party) at the market  rate for similar work but not exceeding (what would have been) his share of the crop.
11/2  If the  worker (irrigator)   enters  into  an  Irrigation  Partnership (Musaqat)  with a party  who, unbeknown to the worker (irriga• tor), has usurped the trees, then  the produce, if any, will belong to the owner ofthe trees and the worker (irrigator) will be entitled to a wage at fair market  rate.  But if the worker  (irrigator)  knew that the trees were usurped,  then  he is not entitled  to any remu• neration.



1183





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (50): Irrigation Partn ership  (Musaqat)

12. Termination  of Irrigation Partnership Contract (Musaqat)

The Irrigation  Partnership (Musaqat)  contract  terminates  upon  the occurrence  of any of the following:

12/1  Harvest and division ofthe crop, if the Irrigation Partnership was linked to the produce of a specific season.

12/2  Completion ofthe agreed term and division ofthe crop in accordance with Item 10/2.

12/3 Death of the worker  (irrigator)  or liquidation  of the institution carrying  out the work if the Irrigation  Partnership  (Musaqat) contract stipulates that the work is non-assignable. If there is no such stipulation, the successor has the option to complete the work on the same terms, either himselfor by hiring workers (irrigators), in return  for the deceased's (or liquidated institution's) share of the crop. If the successor chooses not to complete the work, the owner may complete the work himselfor by hiring others and upon materialization ofthe crop, the successor ofthe worker (irrigator) is entitled to receive a wage at the market rate for similar work for the period of time worked by the deceased (or liquidated institution) but not exceeding his (or its) stipulated share of the crop.

12/4 Death of the trees that are the subject matter  of the contract  or inability ofthe trees to bear fruit.
12/5  Passing of a season without any fruit.

13. Revocation  of Irrigation Partnership Contract (Musaqat)

13/1  Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat) contract is revocable by mutual consent ofthe two parties (Iqalah).

13/2 The owner can revoke the contract in the following situations:

13/2/1 When the worker (irrigator) is unable to perform the work, in which case the following apply:

13/2/1/1 Ifthe worker (irrigator) is unable to work for a reason outside his control, such as an illness, he is entitled to receive a wage



1184





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (50): Irrigation Partn ership  (Musaqat)

at the  market  rate for similar  work for the period  of time worked.
13/2/1/2 If the worker (irrigator) is unable to work for a reason within his control, he is entitled to receive a wage at the market rate for similar work for the period oftime worked. He is also liable to indemnify the owner for actual loss suffered, as determined by experts.

13/2/2 When  the  worker  (irrigator)  stops  working  and  it is not possible to enforce  him (to fulfil the terms of the contract).

13/3  The worker (irrigator) is entitled to revoke the contract ifthe owner refuses to allow him to work. [see item 8/5]

14. Zakat Due on Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat)

See Sharf'ah Standard No. (35) on Zakat, item 5/4/9.

15. Some Applications  of Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat) in Financial
Institutions

15/1 The institution may  enter  into  Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat) contracts with the owners  of trees and then  hire workers (irriga• tors) to carry out the work.

15/2  The institution can own trees and enter into Irrigation Partnership
(Musaqat)  contracts with other parties  to carry out the work.

16. Date of Issuance of the Standard

This Shari'ah Standard was issued on 21 Safar, 1434 A.H., corresponding to 4 January 2013 A.D.















1185





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (50): Irrigation Partn ership  (Musaqat)





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah standard on Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat) was adopted
by the Shari'ah Board in its meeting No. (34) held during the period of20-21
Safar, 1434 A.H., corresponding to 3-4 January 2013 A.D.













































1186





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (50): Irrigation Partn ership  (Musaqat)





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 24Dhul-Qadah 1431 A.H., corresponding to 30 November 2010 A.D., the Secretariat of AAOIFI decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat).

In its meeting No. (30) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain, on 24-26 Jumada II, 1432 A.H., corresponding to 27-29 May 2011 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board discussed the exposure draft ofthe standard and introduced the changes it deemed suitable.

In its meeting No. (31) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain, on 22-24 Dhul• Qa'dah 1432 A.H., corresponding to 20-21 October 2011 A.D., the Shari'ah Board also discussed the exposure draft ofthe standard and introduced the changes it deemed suitable.

In its meeting No.  (32) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah,  on 8-9
Rabi' II, 1433  A.H., corresponding to 1-2 March 2012 A.D.,  the Sharf'ah Board continued its discussions on the draft exposure of the standard and introduced the changes it deemed suitable.

The Secretariat of AAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 16 Jumada II, 1433 A.H., corresponding to 7 May 2012 A.D. The public hearingwas attended by representatives ofcentral banks, institutions, auditing firms, Sharf'ah scholars, academics and others interested in this field.  The members  of the  Shari'ah Board and the  Shari'ah Standards Committee responded to a number of observations and comments raised by the participants.

In its meeting No. (33) held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah on 19-21 Shawwal
1433 A.H., corresponding to 6-8 September 2012 A.D., the Shari'ah Board



1187





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (50): Irrigation Partn ership  (Musaqat)

discussed the changes proposed at the public hearing and introduced the changes it deemed suitable to the draft exposure of the standard.

In its meeting No. (34) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 20-21 Safar
1434 A.H., corresponding to 3-4 November 2013 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the exposure draft ofthe standard, introduced the changes that it deemed suitable and adopted the standard.

In its meeting No.  (35) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munwwarah on 22-23
Shawwal 1434 A.H., corresponding  to 29-30 September 2013 A.D., the Shari'ah Board continued  its discussions on the  exposure draft of the standard, and introduced the changes it deemed suitable, and adopted the standard.







































1188





Sharf'ah Standard No. (50): Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat)





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Permissibility of Musaqat and Its Rationale
■  The basis for the permissibility of Musaqat is  the Sunnah, Ijma and common sense. From the Sunnah, there is the Hadith narrated by Ibn Umar that the Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) gave the land of Khaybar to its inhabitants to work on and cultivate in return for half of its yield (fruits and plants).
Based on  Ijma, the  companions  (may Allah be pleased with them) practiced Musaqat in Khaybar until Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) evacuated them therefrom, without any objection from whosoever. Ijma' or consensus (by Four Schools of Fiqh) as to permissibility of Musaqat was cited by prominent scholars Al-Bisyawi, Ibn Hazm and Al•
'Utabi, Muwaffaq Al-Din Ibn Qudamah, Shams Al-Din Ibn Qudamah
and Al-Shamakhi, the author of "Ghayat Al-Bayan",  Ibn Muflih and Al• Buhuti.

On the basis of common sense, Musaqat fulfils the interest ofboth par•
ties, and is associated with no harm.

Its permissibility may also be deduced in analogy with Mudarabah.
■  The basis for bindingness ofMusaqat once it has been entered into or un• dertaken is the overarching Quranic Verse:  {"O you who believe! Fulfil (your) obligations}.

(2) Related by Al-Bukhari, Chapter on Muzara'ah for half of the produce, and so on. Also, related by Muslim, Chapter on Musaqat for part of the fruits and plants.
(3) See  "AL-Mukhtasar",  AI-Bisyawi,   (P.  291);   "Al-Jami", Abu Al-Hasan, [49:  4];  "AL•
Muhalla", [8/230]; "AL-Diya", [18: 245]; "AL-Mughni", [5: 549-552]; "Al-Sharh AL-Kabir", [5: 557]; "AL-Idah" [6: 233]; "AL-Bahr AL-Ra 'iq" [8: 64]; "AL-Mubdi"  [5: 46]; and "Kashf Al-Qina" [3: 533].
(4) [A1-Ma 'idah (The Table): 1].



1189





Sharf'ah Standard No. (50): Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat)

Elements of Musaqat Contract
■  The basis for stipulating legal competency in a Musaqat contract is the
Prophet's Hadith:  "The Pen has been liftedfrom writing the deeds ofthree: The one who is asleep until one wakes up,  the child until he/she becomes
pubescent and the insane until he/she becomes sane °
■  The basis for the necessity for identification of trees (subject matter of
the contract), and the stipulation of the trees being arable (productive) in usual circumstances is avoidance of Gharar. Trees that are not arable (productive) do not fit the purpose ofMusaqat.
■  The basis for the stipulation of irrigation and cultivation of trees is that work is one of the requisite elements ofthe contract (Arkan), and Musa• qat is invalid in the absence of one of its requisite elements.
Prerequisites of Validity
■  The basis for specification of a predetermined, common share for both parties to the contract is the Hadith narrated by Ibn Omar that the Prophet (peace be upon him)  gave the land of Khaybar to its inhabitants to work on and cultivate in return  for half of its yield (fruits  and plants). The specification oflump-sum compensation will divert the contract away from the features of Musaqat. The determination of a known compensation is meant to avert impermissible obscurity (Jahalah).
■  The basis for the confinement ofwork to fruit growing and tree cultiva• tion is that this what entails work in Musaqat; if another form of work is stipulated in the contract, such a stipulation shall contradict the very nature of the contract, as it only fulfils the interests of one party at the expense of the other.
■  The basis for making the term of Musaqat equal to the period ending
with the time the produce materializes or over a term enough for the produce to materialize is the rules of justice in Sharf'ah so that the trees owner does not exclusively benefit from the produce while the worker receives nothing.  The produce is what the contract is meant to achieve after all, and therefore it is impermissible that the worker is devoid ofhis/ her rights by shortening the term of Musaqat.

(5) Related by Abu Dawud in the Chapter on an insane stealing or becoming liable to punishment.



1190





Sharf'ah Standard No. (50): Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat)

Obligations of the Worker (Irrigator)
■  The basis for the worker's obligation to undertake normal care ofthe trees and for the produce  of fruits is that the people of Khaybar were entrusted with the work, without  anyone else being sent by the Prophet  (peace be upon him) to take up some of Musaqat works.
■  The basis for the prohibition  of sub-contracting  in Musaqat without prior permission is that the trees are not the property ofthe worker (irrigator), nor the worker is authorized by the owner oftrees to do so. And notwithstanding, the owner may not accept that the worker (irrigator) assigns the Musaqat contract to a third-party irrigator.
■    The basis for the permissibility  of using the services of hired  hands  or the like by the worker  (irrigator) is the  general  condition  cited by the Prophet  (peace be upon  him) to the people of Khaybar  that  "they may seek the services of hired hands, but only at their own expense. However, the worker's responsibility/liability shall not cease to exist.°
■  The basis for the Musaqat worker  acting in a fiduciary  capacity (rather than  a position  of liability) is that  he/she is an  agent  on behalf  of the owner in preservation and care of trees and fruits.
Obligations of Trees Owner
■  The basis for the necessity to enable unfettered disposal of the trees for the worker is to allow the worker to perform his duties as per the contract.
Joint Obligations of the Worker and the Owner of Trees
■  The basis for the joint responsibility of the owner of trees and the worker for the preservation  of fruits before harvesting is that the owner may take the fruits after harvesting,  However, before harvesting, the worker alone shall be responsible for the trees and fruits because the owner has granted him unfettered access to the trees.
■  The basis for the division of expenses between the owner and the worker (from their  respective shares)  is that it is more just (closer to justice) so that no harm  is inflicted upon either party because of the other.
■  The basis for obligating the worker to complete the work is that Musaqat is a contract that becomes binding upon commencement  of work, so that

(6) Related by Muslim, Chapter on Musaqat for part of the fruits and plants. Also, related by Abu Dawud, Chapter on Musaqat.



1191





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (50): Irrigation Partn ership  (Musaqat)

neither party shall have the right to revoke it unilaterally. And the basis for the non-entitlement ofthe worker to any compensation in case he stopped the work before materialization  of the produce  is that  he abandoned his obligation  toward  completion  of work and is thus  not  entitled  to receive a share of the produce before materialization. And if the produce materializes, then another  hand may be hired to complete the work at the expense of the worker because in such a case the worker (Al-Musaqi) is entitled to receive a share and shall not be deprived of it, and he shall complete the work, and such an obligation shall not be considered fulfilled unless work is completely carried out. Otherwise, the wage of the hired hands shall be deducted from the share ofthe worker (Al-Musaqi).
■  The basis for obligating the owner oftrees, in case he prevented the worker
from carrying out the work ofMusaqat, to completely fulfil the contract is that the Musaqat contract becomes binding upon commencement ofwork or upon commitment ofnon-revocation (ofthe contract). And in the event that the owner revokes the contract before the produce materializes, the basis for obligating the owner to pay out the prevailing market wages is that the time and effort ofthe worker shall have to be compensated. And in the event that the owner revokes the contract after the produce materializes, then the worker is only entitled to his share in the produce (but not the prevailing market wages).
Division of the Produce
■  The basis for the inclusivity of division of recurring produce is that the worker  contributes with his work to the produce and thus shall not be deprived ofhis respective share. This roughly conforms to the standpoint of Ibadis and Malkis jurists, and coincides with the opinion of some of Hanifis. It has reported that Abu Said Al-Khudri opined that the worker deserves a share in the palm racemes and cotton straws, unless there is a customary practice ('Urf) or a condition  (Shart) to the contrary. Abu Amr Al-Qurtubi also said: "Torn palm leaves and fibers and cords shall be shared by both parties according to their respective shares in the fruits': and this conforms to the law of equity.

(7) "Bayan Al-Shar" [40: 292 and 296]; and  "AL-Kaft" [2: 107].



1192





Sharf'ah Standard No. (50): Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat)

■  The basis for specification of the worker's share as a common  share is the Hadith narrated  by Rafi' on the authority  ofHanzhalah Ibn Qays Al-An• sari who said:  "I asked Raft' Ibn Khadij about paying the rental of a land in gold and silver. He answered:  'There  is no objection to it,  as people in the times of the Prophet (peace be upon him) used to pay rental for plants growing on water ravines/flumes/gullies and high points  of streams and some sorts ofplants. However, the Prophet (peace be upon him) prohibited such practices because the produce  was not properly identified: Some of it used to grow and some used to perish,  and people,  at that time,  were
confined to this kind ofrentals".(9
■  The basis for the entitlement of the worker to his respective share upon materialization of the produce  is that he has contributed to the materia• lization. It is the opinion  of some of Shafis and the majority  of Hanbalis, and it is also followed by Imamis.
Contingencies in Musaqat
■  The basis for non-entitlement of the worker to anything (reward or com• pensation) ifthe produce perished or destroyed by a natural disaster is that one of the effects of partnership  entails that the subject-matter of division is the produce. Therefore, ifthe produce perished or destroyed, then there shall be no division. The same applies to the division of remaining produce in case of partial destruction  due to a natural disaster.
■  The basis for granting  the worker  the option,  in case of non-materiali• zation  of the produce  during  the predetermined period  of time,  either to carry  on his work gratis, or to stop working  and lose his share in the produce, is as dictated by the rules of equity .  The owner of trees benefits through  keeping his trees, even if there is no produce. Any worker with an acceptable  excuse is an exception, where  he shall be entitled  to his share for the worked period  of time, as dictated by the rules of equity.
Trees Belonging  to Third Parties and Usurped Trees
■  The basis for the owner oftrees being entitled to the fruits ifit transpires that the trees belong to a third party is that in essence ownership of fruits shall

(8) Related by Muslim, Chapter on rental oflands, payment in gold and silver.
(9) "KashfAl-Qina" [3:  538]; "AL-Mughni" [5: 576]; "AL-Mubdr" [5: 54]; "AL-Rawdah" [5:
160]; and "Jami' Al-Maqasid"  [7: 376].



1193





Sharf'ah Standard No.  (50): Irrigation Partn ership  (Musaqat)

remain in the hands of the owner unless by virtue of a contract. However, the contract,  in this case, is void. The basis for obligating the party  who contracted with the worker to pay out the prevailing wage to the maximum ofhis stated share is that he worked on a commutative basis, and the contract was doubtful  (not  properly  evidenced  or documented);  it is impractical to pay him  the  agreed compensation  due to the ownership  of the third party, who shall be entitled to the compensation; i.e., the prevailing wage, up to a maximum  of his stated share because the contracting party did not commit  to pay him more than  his share,  especially that no transgression was premeditated.
■  The basis for entitlement  of the owner of trees to take the fruits in case an usurper  (Ghasib) of the trees contracted  with  someone  else to carry out Musaqat  works  is that  the  fruits  remain,  in  essence, owned by the owner unless by a contract to the contrary. And the contract here is void. The basis for obligating the usurper  (Ghasib) to pay the worker who was unaware  of usurpation  is that  it is tantamount to a paid work  (work on a commutative basis) associated with a doubtful contract; it is impossible to pay him the agreed compensation because it belongs to someone else, who shall be entitled to the compensation; i.e., the prevailing wage. The worker shall be deprived of any payment  if he is aware of usurpation because in such a case he becomes a transgressor, and he is among those referred to in
the Hadith:  "Ill-gotten sapling shall have no right therein".(9

Termination  of Musaqat Contract
■  The basis for termination of Musaqat  contract  upon  completion  of pro• duce and division of the crop or passing of the agreed period of time or of a season without  any fruit  is the application  of the contract  that entered into by the two parties.
■  The basis for termination  of Musaqat contract upon the death of the worker or liquidation ofthe institution carrying out the work ifMusaqat was subject to the condition  of work commencement  solely by him or the institution is that the condition was not met. The basis for granting the heirs (either through inheritance, in general, or by transfer of ownership, in particular)

(10) Related by Al-Bukhari, Chapter on wasteland rehabilitation. Also related by Malik, Chapter on building on wasteland



1194





Sharf'ah Standard No. (50): Irrigation Partnership (Musaqat)

the option either to carry on the work as per the set conditions or to stop it is that the heirs or the owners of the institution have had legally inherited this right. The basis for their entitlement to the prevailing wage is that their testator was entitled to the compensation by virtue of his efforts. So if he had died before the produce materialized, then he shall be entitled to the com• pensation. The basis for limiting the compensation, which is the prevailing wage, to a maximum of the testator's share in the produce is that the owner of trees did not commit to pay more than the worker's share. And if conti• nuation of work by the heirs does not entitle them to more than the share of their testator in the produce, then how shall they deserve more without work?
■  The basis for termination of Musaqat  contract  upon  perishing  of trees,
subject matter  of the contract,  or inability of the trees to bear fruit is the Hadith  stating:  "There should  be neither  harm nor malice", because the worker will be excessively harmed ifhe is obligated to work gratis (without compensation).
Revocation of Musaqat Contract
■  The basis for revocation of Musaqat contract by mutual consent of the two parties is the Hadith of Prophet Mohammad  (peace be upon him) stating: "Anyone who consents to revoke the contract upon the request ofa regretting
counterparty, Allah shallforgive  his regretful sins on the Day ofJudgment".
■  The basis for obligation to pay the prevailing wage if the worker is unable to perform the work due to a reason out of his control is that the worker did exert an effort under a contract, therefore he shall be entitled to a compen• sation against that work, and that the work has not been performed  in its entirety, and thus he is paid the prevailing market wage.
■  The basis for liability ofthe worker to indemnify the owner for actual loss suffered for a reason within  his control is that he caused such a loss, and therefore shall be liable.






(11) Related by Ibn Hibban, Chapter on Iqalah.



1195






















Shari'ah Standard No. (51)



Options to Revoke Contracts
Due to Incomplete Performance












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface...................................................................................................      1201
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................      1202

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                             1202
2. Option to Revoke Due to Defect............................................................      1202
3. Option to Revoke Owing to Deal Fragmentation                                    1204
4. Option to Revoke Due to Breach of Description                                    1205
5. Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................      1206
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1207
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1208
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard....................................      1210




























1199








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to explain the situations in which buyers have the option to revoke contracts due to reasons ofdefect, deal fragmentation and breach of description and how such options are exercised in the activities of Institutions.































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



1201





Shari'ah Standard No. (51): Options to Revoke Contracts Due to Incomplete Performance





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers options to revoke contracts  due to reasons of defect, deal fragmentation and breach  of description. It does not cover options to revoke arising from breach  of trust  (dishonest inducement, deception and overcharging)  or options  of due diligence (cooling-off options,  and options  to revoke  due to non-payment) as they have separate  Shari'ah standards dedicated  to them.
2. Option to Revoke Due to Defect

2/1  Definition

It is the  option  of a buyer  to revoke  or continue  with  the  contract arising  from  a hidden  defect  that  the  buyer  did  not  notice  at the time of contract.
2/2 Conditions applicable to options to revoke due to defect

An option to revoke due to defect is subject to the following conditions:

2/2/1 Appearance of a material defect in the  subject matter  of the contract

A material  defect is a defect that  renders the  item defective according to custom, makes it unfit for purpose or diminishes its value.

2/2/2 The defective item being incapable of repair except by incurring cost

2/2/3 The buyer  being  unaware  of the hidden  defect at the time  of contract,  irrespective  of the seller's awareness  of the defect at the time of the contract.

2/2/4 The contract not containing a clause excluding  the seller's li•
ability for defect  (Bay' al-Bara 'ah- sale on the basis  of as is



1202





Shari'ah Standard No. (51): Options to Revoke Contracts Due to Incomplete Performance

where is). It is prohibited for the seller to exclude liability due to defect in Ijarah and lstisna'a contracts.

2/2/5 The hidden defect not being caused by the buyer.

2/3  Scope of the option to revoke due to defect

Options to revoke due to defect exist in commutative financial con• tracts such as sales, money exchange, division ofwealth, settlement of debt by payment  in kind and gift conditional  upon receipt of consideration  (Hibat al-Thawab).

2/4 Time limit

Defective items should be returned,  after taking  delivery of the object of sale and discovering the defect therein, within the period of time customarily allowed for revocation on such grounds.

2/5 Consequences of options to revoke due to defect

The buyer has the option either to revoke the contract and return the item or continue with the contract. Ifthe buyer chooses to return the item after taking delivery, revocation is effected by mutual consent or court order. If the buyer has not taken delivery, and he has been aware ofthe defect before taking delivery, he can unilaterally revoke the  contract  by giving notice  to the  seller and  is entitled upon revocation to a refund ofthe whole price by mutual consent or court order.

2/6 Conditions  applicable to the return of sold items

Return of the item is subject to the following conditions:

2/6/1 Return  of the  item  not  resulting  in  the  fragmentation  of a package deal to which the seller does not consent. And the buyer  shall be entitled  to compensation  against inferiority due to the defect (Arsh).

2/6/2 The item not being damaged or destroyed in the possession of the  buyer,  in  which  case the  buyer  is entitled  only to compensation for the defect and is not entitled to return the item unless the seller accepts return of the damaged item.



1203





Shari'ah Standard No. (51): Options to Revoke Contracts Due to Incomplete Performance

2/6/3 There being nothing  added to the item attached to it but did not grow out of it, which necessities a price rebate,  such as the erection of a building on land. Return of the item is not prevented, ifthe addition to the item is physically connected to it and grows out of it; or is physically separate from it whether it grows out of it, such as dividends on shares and rent from leased assets, or does not grow out of it.

2/6/4 In cases where return due to the defect is impossible (impracti• cal), the buyer shall be entitled to compensation against inferi• ority caused by the defect.

2/7 Impediments preventing the return of sold items

The option to return the sold item is impeded by the non-fulfilment of any of the conditions provided in item 2/2.

2/8 Abating (of the option)

The option to revoke due to defect ceases (abates) in the following situations:

2/8/1  Ifthe defect ceases before the buyer returns the item or payment ofArsh (compensation against inferiority due to the defect).

2/8/2 If the buyer expressly waives his option to revoke.

2/8/3 If the buyer expressly accepts the defective item.

2/8/4  Ifthe buyer's conduct implicitly indicates that he has accepted the defective item, such as continuing to use the item, delaying return of the defective item longer than is customarily acceptable and without an excuse, exploiting or benefitting from the defective item or transferring ownership of the item after discovering the defect.

2/8/5 If the defective item is destroyed by the buyer.

3. Option to Revoke Owing to Deal Fragmentation

3/1  Definition

The option to revoke a contract owing to deal fragmentation  is the option  of the buyer to revoke a contract  (a package deal) that no



1204





Shari'ah Standard No. (51): Options to Revoke Contracts Due to Incomplete Performance

longer includes everything that was contracted  for, resulting in the package deal becoming fragmented.

3/2 Conditions applicable to the option to revoke owing to deal frag•
mentation

The option to revoke a contract owing to deal fragmentation is subject to the buyer not knowing that the deal would become fragmented.

3/3 Types of deal fragmentation in which the option to revoke is granted

3/3/1 When a person sells his own property along with the property of another person in one package without the consent of the other person or when a partner  sells the partnership property in one package without the consent of the other partner.

3/3/2 When it transpires that part of the sold item(s) is the property of a third party.

3/3/3 When  part  of the  sold item(s)  is destroyed  before delivery
(actual or constructive).

3/3/4 When  part  of the  sold item(s)  in a Salam  contract  is not available on the delivery date. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (10) on Salam, item 5/8]

3/4 Prerequisites

Deal fragmentation  entitles the buyer either to revoke the contract or accept what remains of the deal and pay the portion  of the price corresponding to it. The buyer is not entitled to any compensation unless there is a defect in what remains ofthe sold item(s).

4. Option to Revoke Due to Breach of Description

4/1  Definition

The option to revoke due to breach ofdescription is the option ofa buy• er to revoke the contract if the sold item does not meet a condition stipulated in the contract, explicitly or implicitly, such as a car having a specific color.



1205





Shari'ah Standard No. (51): Options to Revoke Contracts Due to Incomplete Performance

4/2 Requirements ofvalid descriptions

4/2/1  The description  must be permissible by the Shari'ah.

4/2/2 The  description   must  be  specific  and  free  from  ambiguity
(Gharar).

4/2/3 The description  must relate to the purpose  of the buyer or be the basis of an increase  in price  or of greater  quality  in the item, such as a requirement that a car be automatic.

4/2/4 The breach of description  must occur at or before the time of delivery (actual or constructive)  and must not be a subsequent occurrence.

4/3 Consequences of the option to revoke for breach of description

4/3/1  Ifthe item fails to correspond to the minim um requirements  of a description, the buyer is entitled to return the item or accept it for its full price without any entitlement  to compensation.

4/3/2 If it is not  possible  to return  the  item,  the buyer  is entitled to a partial  refund  for the breach of description equal to the difference in price between an item that fulfills the description and one that does not.
4/4 Timing and cessation of options to revoke due to breach of description

The option to revoke for breach ofdescription, like the option to revoke for defect, is granted immediately subject to custom and ceases in the circumstances in which the option to revoke due to defect ceases.  [see item 2/7]
4/5 Transfer

The option to revoke for breach of description can transfer to all types of successors and assignees.
5. Date of Issuance of the Standard

The Shari'ah  Board  issued this standard  on 21  Safar1434  A.H., corre•
sponding to 4 January 2013 A.D.



1206





Shari'ah Standard No. (51): Options to Revoke Contracts Due to Incomplete Performance





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted the standard on Options to Revoke Con• tracts Due to Incomplete Performance in its meeting No. (34) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 20-21  Safar  1434  A.H., corresponding  to 3-4
January 2013 A.D.











































1207





Shari'ah Standard No. (51): Options to Revoke Contracts Due to Incomplete Performance





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 14 Rabi' II,  1429 A.H., corresponding to 20 April 2008 A.D., the Secretariat of AAOIFI decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Options to Revoke Contracts Due to Incomplete Performance.

In its meeting held on 29 Jumada II,  1431  A.H., corresponding to 12
June 2010 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee, discussed the study and approved it and assigned to the Shari'ah researcher the preparation of the exposure draft of the standard.

In its meeting held in Dubai (United Arab Emirates) on 24 Ramadan
1431 A.H., corresponding to 3 September 2010 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee discussed the exposure draft of the standard and made some changes in the light of the comments and remarks of the members.
In its meeting No.  (32) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah,  on 8-9
Rabi' II, 1433 A.H., corresponding to 1-2 March 2012 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the exposure draft of the standard and introduced  the changes it deemed suitable.

The Secretariat of AAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 16 Jumada II, 1433 A.H., corresponding to 7 May 2012 A.D. The publichearingwas attended by representatives ofcentral banks, institutions, auditing firms, Sharf'ah scholars, academics and others interested in this field.  The members  of the  Shari'ah Board and the  Shari'ah Standards Committee responded to a number of observations and comments raised by the participants.

In its meeting No.  (33)  held in Makkah Al-Mukarramah  on  19-21
Shawwal  1433  A.H.,  corresponding  to  6-8  September  2012  A.D.,  the



1208





Shari'ah Standard No. (51): Options to Revoke Contracts Due to Incomplete Performance

Shari'ah Board discussed the changes proposed at the public hearing and introduced the changes it deemed suitable to the draft exposure of the standard.

In its meeting No. (34) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 20-21  Safar
1434 A.H., corresponding to 3-4 November 2013 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the exposure draft ofthe standard, introduced the changes that it deemed suitable and adopted the standard.














































1209





Shari'ah Standard No.  (51): Options to Revoke Contracts  Due to Incomplete Performance





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Option to Reconsider Due to Defect
■  The basis for permissibility ofthe option to reconsider due to defect is the Hadith  narrated  by 'A ' ishah (may Allah be pleased with her) that a man purchased  a young  serf,  and then  set him  to work,  then  he found  him to be "flawed" or "defective': so he returned  him  back (to the seller)  on the grounds  of the defect. Thereupon, the Prophet  (peace be upon him) said:  "No yield without risk taking" and in another narration: "No gain without risk taking.Also, there is the Hadith  on a sheep whose udder is tied up in order to look like a one full with milk. If the defect, lack of milk,  is unveiled,  then  the buyer shall have the option  either to keep it or to return  it along with a Sa' of dates. All Schools of Fiqh (Madhahib) embraced  this option, and that the key principle  in the contracts  of sale is freedom from defects.
■  The basis for the stipulation offreedom from defects is what the companions (may Allah be pleased with them all) used to practice, and Othman  (may Allah be pleased with him) issued a rule in favor of using this option in presence of the companions."
■  The basis for the effect of the option  either to return  the subject matter or keep the entire price -which is the standpoint of Hanafis and Shafts- is that the buyer has the right to return the subject- matter  due to defect and the absence of intactness as generally dictated by the contract. The basis for non-entitlement to compensation  (Arsh) in the case where the buyer keeps the subject-matter  is that descriptions  (features) are not considered to form part ofthe price in this case, and because the buyer did not consent that the sold item was transferred for a less than its stated price. The Han-

(2) Related by Abu Dawud and AI-Tirmidhi.
(3) Related by Malik in  "Al-Muwatta";  and Al-Bayhaqi in  "AI-Sunan AL-Kubra" and he rendered it as an authenticate: "Jami' AI-'Usul" [2: 34].



1210





Shari'ah Standard No.  (51): Options  to Revoke Contracts  Due to Incomplete Performance

balls were of the opinions that in case of return, the buyer shall have the right to request Arsh, corresponding to the inferiority caused by the defect.
Option of Deal Fragmentation
■  The basis for permissibility of deal fragmentation is that it is a type of defect (some Fiqh references categorized it under the option to reconsi• der due to defect) and it becomes binding upon returning of a part ofthe object of sale."
■  The basis for the  stipulation  that  the  buyer  shall not  harbor  prior
knowledge about the deal coming into a point  of defragmentation  is that his knowledge is viewed as evidence to consent, and that the defect is not hidden or concealed.
■  The basis for the effect of the option of defragmentation being either
termination  or holding into the remainder of his share in the price is that discounting an amount from the price for the whole deal in lieu of the missing part of the deal represents compensation, and no more than it, because the price (compensation) is for the two parts and is divided between them both.
Option of Breach of Description
■  The permissibility ofthis option is the opinion ofthe majority of Fuqaha, while other Fuqaha categorized this option under option of deception (Khiyar al-Tadlis).
■  The basis for the establishment of compensation  due to incorrect des• cription is that it is practically similar to the option of freedom from defect, in the case of objection to return the object of sale. And in the case where the buyer accepts to keep the object of sale, then he will pos• sess it for the entire price -without application of Arsh- because what is missing here is a description, and descriptions do not have their corres• ponding part of the price in this instance.
■  The basis for transferability of this option upon death to heirs, whether
general or special, is that it falls in the category of physical asset ('Ayn)
ownership.





(4) "AI-Fatawa AL-Hindiyyah" [3: 83].
(5) "Fath Al-Qadir" [5: 1345]; and  "AI-Bahr AL-Ra 'iq" [6:  19].



1211
















Shari'ah Standard No. (52)




Options to Reconsider (Cooling-Off Options, Either-Or Options, and Options to Revoke Due to Non-Payment)












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface...................................................................................................      1217
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................      1218

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                             1218
2. Cooling-Off Options................................................................................      1218
3. Option to Revoke Due to Non-Payment..............................................      1222
4. Either-Or Options....................................................................................      1222
5. General Rules Relating to Option to Reconsider.................................      1224
6. Date of Issuance of the Standard............................................................      1224
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1225
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1226
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard..............................            1228


























1215








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to explain the Shari'ah rules relating to options to reconsider which contracting parties stipulate in their contracts (cooling• off options, either-or options, and options to revoke due to non-payment) and the application of such options in the activities of Institutions.































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



1217



Sharf'ah Standard No. (52): Options to Reconsider (Cooling-Off Options, Either-Or
Options, and Options to Revoke Due to Non-Payment)





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers options to reconsider  ( cooling-off options, either• or options, and options to revoke due to non-payment) that are stipulated by the parties  to grant them  time to reconsider  the transaction. It does not  cover options  to revoke contracts  due to incomplete  performance ( defect,  deal fragmentation and breach  of condition  or description)  or options to revoke contracts due to breach oftrust  (dishonest inducement, deception and  overcharging) as they have  separate  Shari'ah Standards dedicated  to them.

2. Cooling-Off Options

2/1  Definition of cooling-off options

Cooling-off options  give one or both  of the parties  or a third  party the right either to continue  with the contract  or to revoke it within a stipulated period of time. It is effected by any phrase indicating that it is non-binding and revocable during the period  of the option.

2/2 Conditions ofvalidity

Cooling-off options are subject to the following conditions:

2/2/1  The option must be stipulated in the contract unless it is implied by a pre-existing  custom  or the parties  agree to subsequently include it in the contract.

2/2/2 The option must have a stipulated time limit. The option is not valid ifa time limit is not stipulated or ifit is unspecified, such as a stipulation to refer to an expert without stating a time limit, or if the time limit  is indeterminate,  such as stipulating  that the option  will end when a certain  index reaches a particular value. There is no minimum or maximum time limit except if



1218



Sharf'ah Standard No. (52): Options to Reconsider (Cooling-Off Options, Either-Or
Options, and Options to Revoke Due to Non-Payment)

it is contrary to what is customarily acceptable in relation to the subject matter ofthe contract.

2/2/3 The stipulated cooling-off period must coincide with the be•
ginning ofthe contract period.

2/2/4 Ifthe contract relates to several items, it must specify those items to which the option relates, as provided in item 2/8/3.

2/2/5 The subject matter must remain in the condition it was initially in when it was sold, in accordance with item 2/6.

2/3 Scope

Cooling-off options apply to binding  financial contracts, such as sale, lease, transfer of debt, guarantee, division of wealth and Waqf. They do not apply to non-binding  contracts such as unpaid agency or contracts which require payment in advance, such as Salam or which require spot payment ofboth countervalues such as currency exchange.

2/4 Consequences of cooling-off options

2/4/1 The owner ofthe option has the right to confirm the contract or revoke it during the stipulated period. Ifhe does not revoke it during this period, the option lapses and the contract become binding.

2/4/2 The owner of the option may test the sold item and does not thereby lose his right to revoke the contract except if he does so repetitively without need or conducts himself as the owner ofthe sold item in a manner that is contrary to the terms ofthe contract and/or custom.

2/4/3 Where there is a cooling-offoption, the parties are not required to make payment or delivery (the sold item to the buyer and the price to the seller) unless they agree otherwise.  One or both parties may voluntarily make payment  or delivery and the option does not lapse as a result, except if the conduct of the parties towards the countervalues indicates the intention to give or take ownership.  If one party makes payment  or



1219



Sharf'ah Standard No. (52): Options to Reconsider (Cooling-Off Options, Either-Or
Options, and Options to Revoke Due to Non-Payment)

delivery, the other is entitled to hold back, in which case the first party is entitled to demand return ofwhat they have paid/ delivered

2/4/4 The owner ofthe option may offer the item to which the option relates for sale to third parties, and the option does not lapse until the sale is completed.

2/5 Effect of options to cool-off on ownership

2/5/1 If the option to cool-off is owned by both parties or just the seller, there is no transfer of ownership in either countervalue and legal rights related to the subject matter remain solely with the seller to the exclusion ofthe buyer.

2/5/2 If the option is owned by just the buyer, ownership of the sold item transfers  from the seller to the buyer  and the buyer's conduct as the owner of the sold item serves as confirmation of the contract.

2/5/3 Ifan item sold under option is destroyed while in the possession ofthe seller, it is the seller's loss. Ifit is destroyed in the possession ofthe buyer while the buyer owns the option, he is liable to pay its price. If it is destroyed in the possession of the buyer owing to his negligence or violation while the seller owns the option and decides to revoke the contract, the buyer is liable to pay its cost. If it is destroyed in the possession of the buyer without there being any negligence or violation on his part, he has no liability.

2/6  Rules relating to increase in the sold item during the option period

2/6/1 Anything  that  is physically  connected  and grows out of the original, such as agricultural produce  (crops) or animal pro• duce (livestock) belongs to the buyer if the buyer owns the op• tion and confirms the contract. And it belongs to the seller of the seller owns the option, whether he confirms the contract or revokes it.



1220



Sharf'ah Standard No. (52): Options to Reconsider (Cooling-Off Options, Either-Or
Options, and Options to Revoke Due to Non-Payment)

2/6/2 Anything that is physically separate and does not grow out of the original, such as compensation for damage to the sold item caused by a third party during the option period, belongs to the buyer ifhe chooses to conclude the contract. Ifhe chooses to revoke the contract, it belongs to the seller.

2/6/3 Anything that is separate but grows out ofthe original, such as dividends on shares and rent from leased assets belongs to the seller.

2/7 Cessation and lapsing of cooling-off options

2/7/1 When the option period expires, the contract becomes binding.

2/7/2 When the owner of the option exercises his option to revoke the contract,  then the contract terminates.  It is required for the other party to know of the revocation for the revocation to be valid. If the owner of the option concludes the contract, whether expressly or implicitly, the contract becomes binding.

2/7/3 If the sold item is destroyed before physical or constructive delivery, the contract terminates.
2/8 Some applications of cooling-off options

2/8/1 The institution, whether as a seller or buyer, stipulates an op• tion to reconsider whether or not it is worth selling or buying an item.

2/8/2 The institution  stipulates an option to reconsider when pur• chasing items from suppliers in order to offer them to its clients without obtaining a binding promise from them to purchase the items. If the clients do not wish to purchase the items, the institution returns the items to the seller.

2/8/3 The institution  stipulates an option to reconsider in relation to the whole or a part  of a single deal. If the various items being sold are different from each other, the items to which the option relates must be specified. If they are fungible, such as wheat or rice, the percentage to which the option relates must be specified.



1221



Sharf'ah Standard No. (52): Options to Reconsider (Cooling-Off Options, Either-Or
Options, and Options to Revoke Due to Non-Payment)

2/8/4 It is not permissible to use cooling-off options as a ruse to syn• thesise the effect of a benefit enjoyed by the lender in exchange for a giving a loan, which can occur ifthe buyer pays for an item purchased under option, uses the item during the option period and then  returns  it before the option period  expires to receive his money back.

2/8/5 It is not permissible  to use cooling-off options to avoid price fluctuations  during the option period

3. Option to Revoke Due to Non-Payment

3/1  Definition  of option to revoke for non-payment

Options to revoke due to non-payment  are options stipulated by sellers or buyers to enable them to revoke contracts ifthe other party fails to make payment of price or rent on the due date. Such options are not valid unless they are expressly stipulated.

3/2  Scope of option to revoke for non-payment

Options to revoke for non-payment are permissible in contracts that do not require spot payment at time of contract. They are not permissible in Salam and currency exchange contracts.

3/3  Prerequisites

The seller is entitled to revoke the contract  ifthe buyer does not pay the price within the specified period

3/4 Transfer

Options  to revoke due to non-payment lapse upon the death of the owner of the option  (whether it is the seller or the buyer).

4. Either-Or Options

4/1  Definition

4/1/1 Either-or  options entitle the buyer to conclude the contract  to purchase  one or more  item out of several items specified by the contract during  a stipulated  period of time. Such options are created by stipulation  of the parties.



1222



Sharf'ah Standard No. (52): Options to Reconsider (Cooling-Off Options, Either-Or
Options, and Options to Revoke Due to Non-Payment)

4/1/2 It is not required  for the items being sold to be fungible or for their prices to be equal. Iftheir prices are different, the price of each item must be specified.

4/1/3 The  agreed  option  period  must  be specified  and  there  is no minimum or maximum time limit.
4/2 Prerequisites

4/2/1 Either-or  options make ownership attached to one or more of several items to which the option relates but not to any item or items in particular. Ifthe buyer takes delivery of all of them, he is liable to pay for one of them and holds the remaining items on trust. If one of them is destroyed or damaged in his possession, he must purchase it for its price.  If all items are destroyed and their prices are different, the buyer is liable to pay the average price of the  items  for  the  number  of  items  purchased.  For example, if there are three items and he purchased  one of them with an option to choose which one, he is liable to pay one third of the price of each item.

4/2/2 Ifthe items to which the either-or  option relates are destroyed by an act of the seller after the buyer  has taken  delivery,  the buyer is not liable.
4/2/3 Ifthe option period  expires without the buyer choosing which item or items he wishes to confirm, he is legally obligated to do so unless the seller chooses to revoke the contract.

4/2/4 Ifthe buyer treats one of the items in which he has an option as though he owns them, his conduct is deemed to be confirmation of the contract for those items.

4/3 Transfer

Either-or  options  transfer  to the  heirs  of the  owner  of the  option upon his death who in which case enjoy all the rights of the original owner of the option.



1223



Sharf'ah Standard No. (52): Options to Reconsider (Cooling-Off Options, Either-Or
Options, and Options to Revoke Due to Non-Payment)

5. General Rules Relating to Option to Reconsider

5/1  It is not permissible to sell or transfer options to reconsider.

5/2 It is permissible to have two or more options to reconsider in one contract.

6. Date of Issuance of the Standard

The Sharf'ah  Board issued this standard  on 23 Shawwal  1434  A.H., corresponding to 30 December 2013 A.D.












































1224



Sharf'ah Standard No. (52): Options to Reconsider (Cooling-Off Options, Either-Or
Options, and Options to Revoke Due to Non-Payment)





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted the standard on "Options to Reconsider" in its meeting No.  (35) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah,  Kingdom of Saudi  Arabia,  on 22-23 Shawwal  1434  A.H.,  corresponding to 29-30
September 2013 A.D.











































1225



Sharf'ah Standard No. (52): Options to Reconsider (Cooling-Off Options, Either-Or
Options, and Options to Revoke Due to Non-Payment)





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 14 Rabi' II,  1429 A.H.,  corresponding to 20 April 2008 A.D., the Secretariat of AAOIFI decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Options to Reconsider.

In its meeting held on 14 Safar 1430 A.H., corresponding to 9 February
2009 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee, discussed the study, approved it, and assigned to the Shari'ah researcher the preparation of the exposure draft of the standard.

In its meeting held in Dubai,  United Arab Emirates,  on 24 Ramadan
1431 A.H., corresponding to 3 September 2010 A.D., the Shari'ah Standards Committee discussed the exposure draft of the standard and made some changes in the light of the comments and observations of the members.

In its 30th meeting held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on 24-26 Jumada II,
1432 A.H., corresponding to 27-29 May 2011, the Shari'ah Board discussed the exposure draft of the standard and introduced the changes it deemed suitable.

In its meeting No. (31) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain, on 22-24 Dhul• Qadah 1432 A.H., corresponding to 20-22 October 2011 A.D., the Shari'ah Board continued its discussions on the exposure draft of the standard, and introduced the changes it deemed suitable.

The Secretariat of AAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 6 Jumada II,  1434 A.H., corresponding to 16 April 2013 A.D. The  public hearing  was attended  by representatives  of central  banks, institutions, auditing firms, Shari'ah scholars, academics and others interested in this field. The members ofthe Shari'ah Board and the Shari'ah



1226



Sharf'ah Standard No. (52): Options to Reconsider (Cooling-Off Options, Either-Or
Options, and Options to Revoke Due to Non-Payment)

Standards Committee responded to a number ofobservations raised by the participants.

In its meeting No. (35) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah on 22-23
Shawwal 1434 A.H., corresponding  to 29-30 November  2013 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the changes proposed at the public hearing and introduced  the changes it deemed suitable to the exposure draft of the standard, and adopted the standard.














































1227



Sharf'ah Standard No. (52): Options to Reconsider (Cooling-Off Options, Either-Or
Options, and Options to Revoke Due to Non-Payment)





Appendix  (B)

The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


Cooling-Off Option
■  The basis for cooling-off option  is the  Hadith  narrated  by Habban  Bin Munqidh, attributed to the Prophet (peace be upon him), saying:  "Ifyou are concluding a deal say: 'There shall be no Khalabah (misleading marketing or
showcasing ofproducts), then you shall have a 3-day option".
■  The basis for consideration  of all expressions that  imply the cooling-off option is the opinion of the Four Schools of Fiqh (Madhahib). Imam Al• Nawawi said: "This expression (as mentioned  in the Hadith related by Ibn Hibban: "There shall be no Khalabah.."is neither considered to be a kind of literal worship, nor a Shari'ah ruling that a religiously accountable person shall be aware of it?
■  The basis for the stipulation  of timing  for cooling-off conditions  is that an untimed  option results in Jahalah (obscurity or ambiguity) which may lead to dispute. This is the opinion  of the majority of Fuqaha.
• The basis for the stipulation  of attaching the option to the contract is that
detachment contradicts  the prerequisites  of the  contract,  which  entails that it takes effect immediately.6
■  The basis for the stipulation of attaching the option to a binding contract is that its usability comes into existence only when attached to such a contract The basis for invalidity of the stipulation of such an option in contracts that entail taking possession (Qabd)  is that it contravenes Qabd stipulated in Sarf and in Salam.

(2) It has been related by Ibo Hibban. It is a Hadith with acceptable authenticity.
(3) "AI-Fatawa AL-Hindiyyah" [3: 39]; "AL-Mughni" [3: 529]; and others.
(4) "AL-Majmu" [9: 210].
(5) "AL-Mughni" [3: 502]; "Bada 'r' AI-Sana 'i" [5:  300] and "AL-Majmu" by AI-Nawawi,
[9:  191].



1228



Sharf'ah Standard No. (52): Options to Reconsider (Cooling-Off Options, Either-Or
Options, and Options to Revoke Due to Non-Payment)

■  The basis for permissibility (but not the obligability) ofdelivery ofthe two countervalues is that delivery serves both selection and reconsideration, which are literally the purpose of the option.
■  The basis for the situation where the option does not abate upon offering
it for sale is that such a practice is meant to probe the fairness of the price. However, it does abate in case of actual sale because this serves as a testimony to acceptance, as the disposal of the object underlying the option is considered to be as the disposal by owners.
■  The basis for effecting ownership upon sale is that the price does not change if the two parties  opted for continuity  of ownership, and this conforms to the Hanafi School, as opposed to Hanbalis.
If the option is rested with one party, then the position of this standard is based on a variety of perspectives.  [see  applications in the Shari'ah Standard No. (8) on Murabahah]

Option to Revoke Due to Non-Payment
■  The basis for permissibility is Qiyas (analogical deduction)  to the coo• ling-off option and reports dating back to the time of the companions. It was taken up by Hanafis, Malikis and Hanbalis. The wisdom behind its permissibility is the need for the buyer to reconsider/re-evaluate  his knowledge about prices and for the seller to ensure that the proper price is quoted in order to avoid procrastination by the buyer.
■  The basis for impermissibility in contracts in which taking possession (Qabd) is a stipulation -such as Sarf and Salam- is that it is inconsistent with the stipulations of their validity.
■  The basis for abating of the option upon the death of its owner is that it constitutes a readiness and willingness to act, and therefore is not transfe• rable to heirs.
Either-Or Option
■  The basis for permissibility of the either-or option is Qiyas (analogical deduction)  to the cooling-off option; since it conforms to Shari'ah in• junctions- i.e., the cooling-off option- so it was permissible based on it, and due to the need of the buyer to employ it in case of hesitancy as to selection of the most needful from amongst a number  of objects. The majority of Fuqaha adopted it though with different views on definition and scope.



1229



Sharf'ah Standard No. (52): Options to Reconsider (Cooling-Off Options, Either-Or
Options, and Options to Revoke Due to Non-Payment)

■  The basis for all issues pertaining to ownership is the application of the rules relating to Daman (liability) and destruction  (of objects of sales) and to treat both parties according to rules of equity in relation to the price that needs to be paid if the subject-matter ofthe option is destroyed.
■  The basis for the transferability ofthe option to heirs is that a testator has an established ownership in the objects subject matter ofthe option, and as such heirs shall need to identify their selection.
■  The basis for impermissibility of sale and tradability of either-or options is that such options are construed to be mere readiness and willingness (to contract), which cannot be transferred or traded.
■  The basis for combination oftwo options or more is that such combination does not contradict  their prerequisites  -i.e., the effectuating  of sale on an immediate basis.





































1230
























Shari'ah  Standard No. (53)




Arboun (Earnest Money)












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface...................................................................................................      1235
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................      1236

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                             1236
2. Definition of'Arboun (Earnest Money)................................................      1236
3. Permissibility of Earnest Money............................................................      1236
4. Option Period Arising from 'Arboun (Earnest Money) Payment......      1237
5. Lapsing of the Option Arising from 'Arboun (Earnest Money) Pay- ment............................................................................................................      1237
6.  Ownership  and Liability for the Sold Item During the Option Pe- riod.........................................................................................................      1237
7. Delivery ofthe Sale Item During the Option Period...........................      1237
8. Increase in the Sold Item During the Option Period                              1238
9. Disposal ofthe Sale Item Under 'Arboun (Earnest Money) Arrange- ment............................................................................................................      1238
10. Stipulating Refund of Earnest Money in the Contract........................      1239
11. Date of Issuance of the Standard.............................................................      1239
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1240
Appendices
Appendix (a):  Brief History ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1241
Appendix (b):  'The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard.....................................      1242















1233








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to explain the Shari'ah rules relating to the payment of 'Arboun (Earnest Money) in sale contracts and its application in the activities of Institutions.(

































(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



1235





Sharf'ah Standard No. (53): 'Arboun (Earnest Money)





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers the definition of 'Arboun  (Earnest Money), the rules applicable to it and its applications in the activities of institutions in commutative financial transactions that do not require spot delivery of countervalues.  It does not cover payments made prior to contract such as refundable security deposits, commissions or advance payments made subsequent to contracts that are not subject to options.

2. Definition of 'Arboun (Earnest Money)

2/1  Earnest money is paid by the buyer to the seller at the time of contract on the basis that the buyer has the option to revoke the contract during an agreed period oftime. Ifhe confirms the contract, the earnest money is credited towards the price. Ifhe does not confirm the contract or fails to pay the remaining price during the stipulated time, the seller is entitled to forfeit 'Arboun (Earnest Money).

2/2 An agreement to execute a contract in the future (an agreement to sell) is a promise and not a contract. Ifmoney is paid with the promise, it is not considered to be earnest money (Arboun).

2/3  'Arboun (Earnest Money) can be paid in cash, in kind and with a usu•
fruct.

3. Permissibility of Earnest Money

3/1 It is permissible to pay 'Arboun  (Earnest Money) in commutative contracts that do not require spot payment of one or both counter• values whether the sale item is identified or is sold by description

(2) What applies to the buyer also applies to the lessee and the purchaser in an lstisna'a contract, and what applies to the seller also applies to the lessor and the seller in an istisna'a contract, etc.



1236





S h ar f' ah        S t an d ar d N o. ( 5 3 ) :  'Ar b o un  ( E ar n e s t M o n e y )

for future delivery (ljarah Mawsufah Fi al-Dhimmah),  such as sales, Istisna'a contracts, leases of identified assets and of assets leased by description for a future date.

3/2 Payment of 'Arboun  (Earnest Money) is not permissible in  Salam and currency exchange contracts.

4. Option Period Arising from 'Arboun (Earnest Money) Payment

The option period arising from the payment of 'Arboun (Earnest Money) must be specified either by express stipulation ofthe parties, or by custom ifthere is an existing custom that specifies the option period.
5. Lapsing of the Option Arising from 'Arboun (Earnest Money) Payment

5/1  The buyer loses his right to revoke the contract if he informs  the seller that he has confirmed the contract or disposes the sold item in a manner that indicates confirmation. The contract may stipulate conduct that indicates lapsing of the option and confirmation of the contract in order to avoid dispute. [see Shari'ah Standard No. (52) on Options to Reconsider]

5/2 If the option period expires without the buyer paying the remaining price to the seller and without the seller having agreed an extension, the contract is considered revoked and the buyer is not entitled to recover the 'Arboun (Earnest Money).

6. Ownership and Liability for the Sold Item During the Option Period

Prior to delivery, the seller is liable for any loss to the sale item. If it is destroyed or damaged before delivery to the buyer or delivery is not pos• sible, the contract is void and the earnest money must be returned to the buyer. After delivery, the buyer is liable for the sale item. If it is destroyed or damaged after delivery to the buyer, the buyer's option is canceled and he is required to pay the balance (unpaid part ofthe price) to the seller.

7. Delivery of the Sale Item During the Option Period

The buyer may take delivery of the sale item during the option period, which does not on its own indicate confirmation of the contract unless the buyer's conduct indicates that he has accepted the sale item.



1237





S h ar f' ah        S t an d ar d N o. ( 5 3 ) :  'Ar b o un  ( E ar n e s t M o n e y )

8. Increase in the Sold Item During the Option Period

8/1  Increase  that  is physically  connected  to the  original  is considered part of the original.

8/2  In principle, any growth in (increase to, and/or yield of) the sale item that  is physically  separate  from  it, which  occurs  during  the option period  whether  prior to delivery or after delivery is considered part of the sale item. It is permissible for the party who is liable for the sale item to stipulate that  any increase that is physically separate should belong  to him, even if ultimate  ownership  of the  sale item  is not vested in him.

9. Disposal of the Sale Item Under 'Arboun (Earnest Money) Arrangement

9/1  If the sold item is identified,  the seller is not entitled  to dispose of it. If the  seller does dispose  of it by sale or lease or otherwise,  his actions are subject to the rules relating to uncommissioned (Fodooli) disposals. If the buyer ratifies the seller's actions, he loses his option and  is liable for the  remainder of the  price to  the  first seller.  The first seller's disposal becomes binding  and the first buyer is entitled to receive the sale price.  If the first buyer does not ratify the seller's actions, the second disposal is void.  [see Sharf'ah  Standard No. (23) on Agency and Acts ofUncommissioned Agent (Fodooli)]

9/2  If the sale is related to an identified  item, the seller cannot  deliver a different  item even with same specifications,  except with the con• sent  of the buyer,  in which  case what  the buyer  has paid  remains
'Arboun (Earnest Money).

9/3 If the buyer  stipulates that  he will offer the sale item to his clients during the option period  and the seller accepts this, the buyer's right to revoke the contract  remains valid during the option period, even after offering the item to his clients. The conclusion  of a sale to one of his clients is deemed to be confirmation of the contract.

9I4 It is not permissible to negotiate/trade options arising from payments of'Arboun (Earnest Money). [see Sharf'ah Standard No. (20) on Sale of Commodities in Organized  Markets]



1238





S h ar f' ah        S t an d ar d N o. ( 5 3 ) :  'Ar b o un  ( E ar n e s t M o n e y )

10. Stipulating  Refund of Earnest Money in the Contract

It is permissible for the buyer to stipulate a condition in the contract providing for a refund of earnest money in specific situations, such as the buyer's failure to obtain licenses from the relevant authorities.

11. Date of Issuance of the Standard

The Shari'ah Board issued this standard on 15 Muharram1435 A.H., corresponding to 8 November 2014 A.D.













































1239





S h ar f' ah        S t an d ar d N o. ( 5 3 ) :  'Ar b o un  ( E ar n e s t M o n e y )





Adoption of the Standard


The Shari'ah Board adopted the standard on 'Arboun (Earnest Money)
in its meeting No. (39) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain on 13-15 Muharram
1435 A.H., corresponding to 6-8 November 2014 A.D.













































1240





S h ar f' ah        S t an d ar d N o. ( 5 3 ) :  'Ar b o un  ( E ar n e s t M o n e y )




Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 19 Rabi' I,  1433 A.H., corresponding  to 12 March 2012 A.D., the Secretariat of AAOIFI decided to commission  a Shari'ah consultant  to prepare a juristic study on 'Arboun (Earnest Money).

In its meeting No.  (35) held in Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah on 22•
23 Shawwal 1434 A.H., corresponding to 29-30 September 2013 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the exposure draft ofthe standard and introduced the changes it deemed suitable.

In its meeting No. (37) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain on 19-21 Jumada I, 1435 A.H., corresponding to 20-22 March 2013 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board continued  its discussions  on  the  exposure  draft  of the  standard,  and introduced the changes it deemed suitable.

In its meeting No. (38) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain on 28 Sha'ban •
1 Ramadan 1435 A.H., corresponding to 26-28 June 2014 A.D., the Sharf'ah Board continued its discussions on the exposure draft ofthe standard, and introduced the changes it deemed suitable.

The Secretariat of AAOIFI held a public hearing in the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia (Riyadh) on 28 Dhul-Hajjah 1435 A.H., corresponding to 22 October
2014 A.D. The public hearing was attended by representatives ofcentral banks, institutions, auditing firms, Shari'ah scholars, academics and others interested in this field. The members of the Shari'ah Board and the Shari'ah Standards Committee responded to a number of observations raised by the participants.

In its meeting No. (39) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain on 13-15 Muharram
1435 A.H., corresponding to 6-8 November 2014 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the changes proposed at the public hearing and introduced the changes it deemed suitable to the exposure draft ofthe standard, and adopted the standard.



1241





S h ar f' ah        S t an d ar d N o. ( 5 3 ) :  'Ar b o un  ( E ar n e s t M o n e y )





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


■  The basis for permissibility of 'Arboun (Earnest Money) is a narration that Natl' Ibn Abdul-Harith purchased a building in Mecca to be used as a prison from Safwan Ibn Umayyah, provided that if Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) approves the sale, then the sale is considered to be effected by him (Umar) and on his behalf (Umar's), and if not, then Safwan shall be paid 400 dinars.
Also, there is a narration that Ibn Sirin said: "A man said to a lessor of ride camels: prepare your camels, so that ifI did not leave with you on so and so day, you get 100 dirhams. Then he did not leave with him': And Shurayh said: "He who voluntarily makes it incumbent  upon himself to do something  (with a condition  and without coercion), then he shall have to honor the condition. Hence, 'Arboun is similar, where a buyer pays part ofthe price and says: "IfI did not confirm the sale, the 'Arboun is yours to keep': Payment of the 'Arboun either at time of contract or later at the time of relinquishing it is valid.
■  The basis for impermissibly of 'Arboun in Sarf and Salam contracts is that 'Arboun is embedded with a cooling-off option  (Khiyar al-Shart), which according to the majority of Fuqaha (of the Four Schools of Fiqh) is impermissible in Sarfcontracts (currency exchange transactions). This rule was deduced from the Hadith: "Goldfor gold, silverfor silver. .. likefor
like, equalfor equal, and hand to hand. Ifthese types differ, then sell them
as youfindproper, provided it is hand to hand".

Ibn Umar (may Allah be pleased with both of them) is reported to have said: "O, Messenger ofAllah, hold on that I may ask you a question: I sell camels in Baqi, so that I sell for dinars and receive dirhams, and I sell for dirhams and receive dinars. I take so and so of this and pay so and so of that? Then the Prophet (peace be upon him) said: "No harm thatyou apply



1242





S h ar f' ah        S t an d ar d N o. ( 5 3 ) :  'Ar b o un  ( E ar n e s t M o n e y )

the market  rate unless you (you and the counterparty) leave the transaction session without  settlement of dues".  'Therefore,  this was an evidence on the requirement  to take possession of both  countervalues  (Qabd)  at the contracting session (Majlis al-'Aqd).

'Arboun   is  also  impermissible   in  Salam  contract,  because  in  Salam, payment  of the price ( capital of Salam) shall be settled at the contracting session. The Prophet (peace be upon him) said:  "Whoever pays money in
advancefor dates (to be delivered later) shouldpay itfor a known specified
weight and measure (of the dates)....". This implies that unless the price is paid in full before the two parties  leave the contracting  session, the transaction is not deemed to be Salaf (or Salam).
■  The basis for determination of a specific term  for 'Arboun is to avoid
Gharar  that  may result  from  an unknown term (Jahalah  that  involves
'Arboun term).
■  The basis for the seller being liable for the object of sale before delivery and for the buyer being liable for it after delivery is the Sharf'ah maxim: "Ownership (title) shall be established upon the conclusion of the contract, while liability is contingent upon delivery (Qabd)':
■  The basis for attributing growth connected to the original is that it represents an integral part of it.
■  The basis for attributing growth  and yields, separate from the object of sale, to the object of sale is the saying of the Prophet (peace be upon him): "AL-Kharaj Bi al-Daman" (i.e., entitlement to revenue is based on bearing liability for the revenue-generating asset).


















1243






















Shari'ah Standard No. (54)



Revocation of Contracts by
Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option












Contents


Subject                                                                                      Page

Preface...................................................................................................      1249
Statement of the Standard.....................................................................      1250

1. Scope of the Standard                                                                             1250
2. Definition ofCooling-Off Options to Revoke......................................      1250
3. Form of Cooling-Off Options to Revoke                                                1250
4. Permissibility of Cooling-Off options to Revoke.................................      1250
5. Causes Triggering Revocation Rights....................................................      1250
6. Conditions ofValid Revocation..............................................................      1251
7. Impediments  to Revocation....................................................................      1251
8. Consequences ofRevocation..................................................................      1251
9. Waiver ofRevocation Rights...................................................................      1251
10. Payment for Waiver ofRevocation Rights.............................................      1252
11. Application of Cooling-Off Options to Revoke....................................      1252
12. Date of Issuance ofthe Standard.............................................................      1253
Adoption of the Standard......................................................................      1254
Appendices                                                                                             . Appendix (a):  BriefHistory ofthe Preparation of the Standard..............      1255
Appendix (b):  The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard....................................       1257
















1247








IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE MOST MERCIFUL

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, and blessings and peace be upon our master, Muhammad, and his household and all his companions





Preface


This Standard aims to define contract revocation and in particular, revo• cation by exercise of a cooling-off option (Khiyar al-Shart), to distinguish it from other types of contract termination that resemble it, to explain its causes and conditions, impediments to it and its application in the activities of Islamic financial institutions.






























(1) The word (Institution/Institutions) is used here to refer, in short, to Islamic financial institutions including Islamic Banks.



1249





Sharf'ah Standard No. (54): Revocation  of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option





Statement of the Standard


1. Scope of the Standard

This Standard covers the stipulation of revocation of valid and binding contracts and the causes and consequences of and impediments to such revocation. It does not cover the expiry of contracts at the end of their contractual terms or nullification owing to the absence of a condition required by the Shari'ah.

2. Definition  of Cooling-Off Options to Revoke

Revocation by exercise of a cooling-off option refers to the termination of a valid and binding contract by virtue of a stipulation in the contract giving one ofthe parties the option to revoke the contract.

3. Form of Cooling-Off Options to Revoke

A cooling-off option to revoke can be stipulated in the contract in any form that indicates it, and it is not required to use any specific word with the meaning of revocation.

4. Permissibility of Cooling-Off Options to Revoke

4/1 It is permissible for both parties to stipulate an option for one or both of them to revoke the contract in specific situations agreed in the contract, without violating Sharf'ah rules.

4/2 Revocation by exercise of a cooling-off option is valid if its causes exist, its conditions are satisfied and there are no impediments. It is invalid ifits causes do not exist, any of its conditions is not satisfied, if there is an impediment or it is contrary to Shari'ah.

5. Causes Triggering Revocation Rights

The cause that triggers the cooling-off option is the existence of one of the situations stipulated in the contract, the occurrence of which gives one or both parties a conditional right to revoke.



1250





Sharf'ah Standard No. (54): Revocation  of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option

6. Conditions  of Valid Revocation

The following conditions must be fulfilled for revocation to be valid:

6/1  Existence of the cause triggering the option to revoke at the time of the revocation.

6/2 Absence of any impediments.

6/3 Notification of the revocation given by the owner of the cooling-off option to the other party according to the requirements  of custom.

6/4 Exercise of the cooling-off option  to revoke by the owner of the option.

7. Impediments  to Revocation

Revocation cannot take place in the following situations:

7I1  Destruction ofthe sale item caused by a natural disaster after delivery.

7/2 Destruction  of the sale item caused by the buyer whether before or after delivery.

7/3 Conduct that transfers ownership and creates rights for third parties, such as selling or gifting the sale item resulting in ownership passing to a third party.

7I4 Expiry of the period  specified in the contract  for exercise of the cooling-off option.

8. Consequences of Revocation

Revocation  nullifies the  contract  at the  moment  of revocation. Any growth in the sale item that is physically attached to it is considered part of it. Any growth in the sale item that is physically separate from it and occurs between the time ofcontract and revocation and before the buyer takes delivery belongs to the seller. If it occurs after deliver, it belongs to the buyer.

9. Waiver of Revocation Rights

If the owner of a cooling-off option chooses not to exercise his right to revoke and there is no specific recurring harm attributable to the cause



1251





Sharf'ah Standard No. (54): Revocation  of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option

triggering  the option,  the buyer  is deemed  to have permanently waived the option. If the harm  attributable to the cause triggering the option  is recurring or continuous, the option is not waived. For example, if a leased asset breaks down and the buyer chooses not to revoke the contract  and repairs the asset and then  the asset breaks  down again, the buyer is still entitled  to exercise his option to revoke.

1 O. Payment for Waiver of Revocation Rights

10/1  It is not permissible  to  stipulate payment  for waiver of revocation rights in a sale contract.  In contracts that  run  for specified terms, such as leases (ljarah), Istisna'a, debt transfer  (Hawalat al-Dayn), share cropping (Muzara'ah), tree planting partnership  (Mugharasah) and  agency (Wakalah), it is permissible  for one of the parties  to waive their rights to the remaining period of the contract in return
for a consideration  agreed at the time of waiver.

10/2 Unforeseen  circumstances resulting  in non-exercise  of a right to revoke are excluded from the above rule.
11. Application of Cooling-Off Options to Revoke

11/1  Cooling-off options  to revoke may be stipulated  in credit facility agreements  to be triggered by events of default relating to solven• cy, potential  insolvency  before it occurs or breach  of a restrictive covenant  in the contract.

11/2  If the lessor stipulates in a lease contract  that he is entitled to add a supplementary rental amount at the beginning of each lease peri• od to cover the costs of maintenance, insurance and taxes levied on owners, and the lessee refuses to accept that, the lessor is entitled to revoke the contract.  If the lessee has given a prior  promise  to purchase  the leased asset, the lessor can exercise his rights under the promise  and  demand  performance from  the lessee provided that the supplementary rent for that lease period  is not added  to the purchase price.

11/3  A creditor is entitled to stipulate the right, after notifying the debtor, to accelerate all installments and the right to revoke the contract or



1252





Sharf'ah Standard No. (54): Revocation  of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option

one of them  in the event that the debtor fails to pay two or more instalments despite being solvent.
11/4  If the seller stipulates that the buyer provides security or surety or any other form of guarantee  and the buyer fails to provide it, the seller is entitled to revoke the contract.

11/5  For other situations ofrevocation that apply in options to reconsider, options to revoke for incomplete performance  and options to revoke for breach of trust, see the relevant Shari'ah Standards.

12. Date of Issuance of the Standard

The Sharf'ah  Board issued this standard  on  15  Muharram   1435  A.H., corresponding  to 8 November 2014 AD.





































1253





Sharf'ah Standard No. (54): Revocation  of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option





Adoption of the Standard


The Sharf'ah Board adopted the standard on Revocation of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option in its meeting No.  (39) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 13-15 Muharram 1435 A.H., corresponding to 6-8
November 2014 A.D,











































1254





Sharf'ah Standard No. (54): Revocation  of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option





Appendix (A) Brief History of
the Preparation of the Standard


On 1 Sha'ban 1431 A.H.,corresponding to 13 July 2010 A.D. the Secretariat of AAOIFI decided to commission a Shari'ah consultant to prepare a juristic study on Revocation of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option.

In its meeting held on 9May 2012 A.D., the Sharf'ah Standards Committee discussed the study and the exposure draft of the standard  and introduced the changes it deemed suitable in the light ofthe comments and observations of the members.

In its meeting No. (34) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 20-21 Safar 1434
A.H., corresponding to 3-4 January 2013 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the  exposure draft of the standard, and introduced  the changes it deemed suitable.

In  its meeting  No.  (35) held  in  Al-Madinah   Al-Munwwarah on  22•
23 Shawwal  1434  A.H.,  corresponding to  29-30  September  2013  A.D., the Sharf'ah Board continued  its discussions  on the exposure  draft of the standard, and introduced the changes it deemed suitable.

In its meeting No. (37) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain on 19-21 Jumada I, 1435 A.H., corresponding to 20-22 March 2013 A.D., the Shari'ah Board continued   its  discussions   on  the  exposure   draft  of the  standard,  and introduced the changes it deemed suitable.

The  Secretariat  of AAOIFI held  a public  hearing  in  the  Kingdom  of Bahrain on 6 Jumada II, 1434 A.H., corresponding to 16 April 2013 A.D. The public hearing was attended by representatives of central banks, institutions, auditing firms, Shari'ah scholars, academics and others interested in this field The members  of the Sharf'ah Board and the Shari'ah Standards  Committee responded to a number  of observations raised by the participants.



1255





Sharf'ah Standard No. (54): Revocation  of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option

In its meeting No. (38) held in the Kingdom of Bahrain on 28 Sha'ban •
1 Ramadan 1435 A.H., corresponding to 26-28 June 2014 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the changes proposed at the public hearing, and introduced the changes it deemed suitable to the exposure draft of the standard, and adopted the standard.

In its meeting No. (39) held in the Kingdom ofBahrain on 13-15 Muharram
1435 A.H., corresponding to 6-8 November  2014 A.D., the Shari'ah Board discussed the exposure draft of the standard and introduced the changes it deemed suitable, and adopted the standard.











































1256





Sharf'ah Standard No. (54): Revoca tion of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option





Appendix  (B)
The Shari'ah Basis for the Standard


• Stipulation of cooling-off options apply only to binding  contracts be• cause nonbinding contracts are by their nature revocable by one or both parties.
■  The validity of revocation by any form of language, that indicates it, is
based on the general Shari'ah maxim: "Contracts are interpreted accor• ding to intent and inherent meaning of the parties and not by the words or forms used" (Maxims of Al-Majallah Al-i\dliyyah) and the statement of some jurists that the use of the technical word "Revocation" is desi• gnated by jurists and what is important is its meaning.
■  The existence of the cause triggering the option to revoke is required because revocation is contrary to the norm and rule that contracts are generally binding and that in principle consequences must flow necessarily from their causes, and that the cause must exist at the time ofrevocation.
■  The requirement that the other party be notified ofrevocation is based on the opinion ofAbu Hanifah and Muhammad Ibn Al-Hasan, contraryto the opinion of the majority of jurists, because notification averts harm from the other party who, unaware of the revocation, may conduct themselves to their detriment.
■  The four impediments to the exercise of cooling-off options are based variously on the following rationale: (I) Revocation would contradict the basic elements ofthe contract which have been validly established; or (II) revocation would contradict consent implied by conduct (implied terms have the same legal effect as express ones); or (III) revocation is impossible because the term ofthe contract has expired; or (IV) the subject matter of the option to revoke is deemed by law to have ceased to exist.

(2) "Sharh Al-Minhaj Wa Hashiyat Al-Qalyubr" [2: 195]
(3) "AI-Furuq" by Al-Qaraf [3: 269] and "AI-Qalyubr" [2: 189]



1257





Sharf'ah Standard No. (54): Revocation  of Contracts by Exercise of a Cooling-Off Option

■  The basis for the ruling on the effect of revocation and that revocation nullifies the  contract  immediately,  is the  prevailing viewpoint  of the Shafi'i  and Hanbali  schools.  Revocation  invalidates  ownership  in sale contracts. This ruling holds true for the asset sold (subject-matter of the contract), whereas increments  in the asset sold (separate growth) from time of contracting until revocation and before delivery to buyer, belong to the seller who becomes the owner at orjust prior to time ofrevocation. When the buyer takes possession of the asset sold, any separate growth belongs to him.
■  The basis for the rulings stated in item 9 regarding waiver of revocation
right is the viewpoint which Al-Zarkashi has indicated in his book titled
"AL-Manthur Fi Al-Qawa'id".(5
■  The basis for impermissibility of stipulating compensation in the contract as a condition for waiver of revocation right, is based on analogy to Iqa• lah, which is considered as one form of contract revocation and has to be performed without any increase or decrease in considerations. Similarly, Shari'ah prohibits waiver ofsome rights (such as pre-emption  and demar• cation rights) against compensation.
■  The basis for permissibility of stipulating, in the contract, compensation
for waiver of the remaining periods of revocation right, in case of conti• nuous contracts such as leasing, is the fact that the party who waives his right owns a benefit that makes him entitled to remuneration.
■  The basis for applications ofconditional revocation is the rulings indicated in the Sharf'ah standard that relates to each application, because rulings on these applications are derived from these preceding standards.












(4) "Ibn Abidin" [4:  108]  and  "Nihayat AL-Muhtaj" [3: 434] (5) "AI-Manthur Fi AI-Qawa'id" [2: 151]



1258









SABB <I est.
-
Islamic Financial Services



Overview: Publication  Sponsor
Islamic Financial Services in SABB Bank


Banks have become very important for all people and businesses all over the world. They are the backbone ofany financial or economic system at both the local and international levels. Due to their importance, banks are highly regulated by most countries. This is because the country's economy depends totally on the activities of its banks. The stronger and more effective the banks are, the more likely it is that the economic and financial systems may be more stable and effective. All this explains why the countries normally pay much attention to monitoring  and regulating systems for their banks and financial institutions as a means to maintain and increase the efficiency of their banking and financial operations.

The increasing number of economic and financial activities and trans• actions in the world in general and in the Islamic community in particular highlights the need for more Islamic banking services. This is why the Islamic banks, in a highly competing market, do their best to provide their custom• ers with high-quality Islamic banking services that help them manage their financial transactions in a Shariah-compliant way.

The Saudi British Bank (SABB) is one of the banks that  offer such Islamic  banking  services.  In  2001, the  Bank  opened  a new  section, Amanah, to  provide  services  and  products   compatible  with  Shariah standards under the supervision of an independent Shariah Committee. In 2012, the name ofthis section has been changed to "Islamic Financial Services"?



1259




Overview: Publication Sponsor
Islamic Financial Services in SABB Bank

SABB has a network  consisting  of 102 branches  including  18  ladies' section branches. All SABB branches provide Islamic financial services. The bank provides Islamic financial services and solutions as well as treasury services for both personal and corporate customers.
For Personal Customers:
1. Personal finance based on the concept ofTawarruq and Murabahah

a) Tawarruq product (MAL)
MAL is a personal financing product based on Tawarruq. It is one of the sales types compatible with Shariah principles and approved by SABB Shari'ah Committee  whereby the bank owns the metal purchased  from the international metal market  and then  sells it to the customer  at a fixed profit margin and the value thereof is payable over a maximum period of 5 years.

b) Murabahah product (SAHAM)
SAHAMis personal finance product based on Murabaha. It is one of the sales types compatible with Shariah principles and approved by Shariah Committee at SABB whereby the bank purchases Shariah compatible local shares from the Tadawul and then sells it to the customer at a fixed profit margin and the value thereof is payable over a maximum period of 5 years.

2. Real estate finance

Real Estate Finance is based on the concept ofljarah with the promise to transfer ownership. It is a Shariah-compliant transaction whereby SABB purchases the house and then leases it to the customer with the promise to transfer ownership at monthly installment and finance period up to 25 years.

For Personal and Corporate Customers:
1. Murabahah commodity investment account:

Murabahah Commodity Investment Account is an alternative product for conventional fixed deposits product and it is an investment vehicle for customers wishing to gain attractive returns at low risks in short and medium terms.



1260




Overview: Publication Sponsor
Islamic Financial Services in SABB Bank

For Corporate Customers:
I. Islamic cash line

Islamic Cash Line is a product  approved by Shariah Committee  at the Bank  as the  first alternative  solution  to the  conventional  overdraft. The product  is structured  by combining:

a) Murabahah liquidity/Tawarruq. b) Mudarabah  investment  account.
2. Tawarruq

Tawarruq product provides companies with Shariah-compliant solutions for satisfying liquidity requirements  for working capital or expansion projects. The product  concept is based on the customer's purchase  of metals owned by the bank on deferred payment including agreed profit margin. Upon ownership ofthe metals, the customer can authorizes SABB TSY to sell the goods on his behalf and receive the proceeds accordingly.

3. Import documentary credits

Import   Documentary  Credit  is  a  Shariah-compliant  product   based on Murabahah  concept, i.e., selling at cost price plus profit. The bank, upon the customer's request, opens a D/C and purchases the goods from origin. Upon the bank's taking constructive  possession of the goods as per documents  ( arrival of documents)  or physical possession (arrival of goods), it sells the goods to the customer  at cost price plus profit.

Treasury Services Include:

1. Islamic rate hedge against fluctuation  of finance cost

Hedging against fluctuations  of finance is a treasury tool used to limit or minimize the  effects  of interest  rate/profit margin fluctuation, allowing companies to manage their floating rates obligations against fixed rate through  SABB Hedge SWAP.

2. Promise to exchange

Promise to Exchange is an alternative Islamic solution to conventional options, which provides protection against the risk of adverse exchange



1261




Overview: Publication Sponsor
Islamic Financial Services in SABB Bank

rates movements in the future and allows the customer to make use of such movements.

To ensure their compliance with Shariah standards, all newly developed or proposed Islamic products  are presented first to Shariah Committee. IFS department gathers and classifies all issues that the bank, its customers or employees seeks Shariah opinion thereon.
In addition  to arranging  the procedures  for adopting  Islamic products, IFS also  monitors/supervises  the  practical  application  of products   and ensure actual compliance with the Shariah resolutions and regulations   by conducting periodic visits to the various departments of the bank that offer Islamic financial products.

The visit reports are then submitted periodically to the Shariah Committee for obtaining its directions and recommendations on the reported issues.



































1262








I                                                      I
SHARI'AH
STANDARDS








58om





SHARI' AH
STANDARDS


The volume of Shari'ah Standards has become the most prominent compilation  of contemporary Fiqh  reasoning  in the area of Fiqh al-Mua'amalt (Jurisprudence of Financial Transactions) around the globe. The  standards  cover  a   large  array  of Islamic  financial contracts and products, including those pertaining  to  banking, Islamic insurance, investment banking, capital, markets, financing, and so on.

These standards are widely popular  in the global Islamic finance industry, and are deemed the most outstanding Shari'ah reference for that industry, including  legislative bodies, regulatory authorities, and financial institutions, and other professional entities such as law firms, accounting and consultancy firms, in addition to universities, academic institutions and research centers and Fatwa issuing bodies.

Currently, AAOIFI standards are officially adopted by a number of central banks and financial authorities on a  mandatory basis or as guidance. Hence, these standards are rightfully a major hallmark for the Islamic finance industry and one its principal accomplishments.






Sponsored By

SABB Oest..
